
  
  Coningsby; or, the   
  New Generation.   
  By B. Disraeli, esq. M.P.  
  Author of "Contarini Fleming."  
  Second Edition.  
  In Three Vols.  
  London: Henry Colburn, publisher; Great Marlnorough Street.  
  1844.  
  
  TO HENRY HOPE.  
  It is not because these volumes were conceived and partly executed amid the glades
     and galleries of the   Deepdene   , that I have inscribed them with your name. Nor merely
     because I was desirous to avail myself of the most graceful privilege of an author, and
     dedicate my work to the friend, whose talents I have always appreciated and whose virtues I
     have ever admired.  
  But because in these pages I have endeavoured to picture something of that development of the
     new and, as I believe, better mind of England, that has often been the subject of our converse
     and speculation.  
  In these volumes you will find many a thought illustrated and many a principle attempted to
     be
      /  established that we have often together partially discussed and canvassed. Doubtless you
     may encounter some opinions with which you may not agree, and some conclusions the accuracy of
     which you may find cause to question. But if I have generally succeeded in my object: to
     scatter some suggestions that may tend to elevate the tone of public life; ascertain the true
     character of political parties; and induce us for the future more carefully to distinguish
     between facts and phrases, realities and phantoms; I believe that I shall gain your sympathy,
     for I shall find a reflex to their efforts in your own generous spirit and enlightened
     mind.  
  Grosvenor Gate, May-Day, 1844.  
  
  
  
  VOL. I.  
 / 
  Book I.  
  CHAPTER I.  
  It was a bright May morning some twelve years ago, when a youth of still tender
       age, for he had certainly not entered his teens by more than two years, was ushered into the
       waiting-room of a house in the vicinity of St. James's Square, which, though with the general
       appearance of a private residence, and that too of no very ambitious character, exhibited at
       this period
        /  symptoms of being occupied for some public purpose.  
  The house door was constantly open, and frequent guests even at this early hour crossed the
       threshold. The hall table was covered with sealed letters; and the hall porter inscribed in a
       book the name of every individual who entered.  
  The young gentleman we have mentioned found himself in a room which offered few resources
       for his amusement. A large table amply covered with writing materials, and a few chairs were
       its sole furniture, except the grey drugget that covered the floor, and a muddy mezzotinto of
       the Duke of Wellington that adorned its cold walls. There was not even a newspaper; and the
       only books were the Court Guide and the London Directory. For some time, he remained with
       patient endurance planted against the wall, with his feet resting on the rail of his chair;
       but at length in his shifting posture he gave evidence of his restlessness, rose from his
       seat, looked out of the window into
        /  a small side court of the house surrounded with dead walls, paced the room, took up the
       Court Guide, changed it for the London Directory, then wrote his name over several sheets of
       foolscap paper, drew various landscapes and faces of his friends; and then, splitting up a
       pen or two, delivered himself of a yawn, which seemed the climax of his weariness.  
  And yet the youth's appearance did not betoken a character that, if the opportunity had
       offered, could not have found amusement and even instruction. His countenance, radiant with
       health and lustre of innocence, was at the same time thoughtful and resolute. The expression
       of his deep blue eye was serious. Without extreme regularity of features, the face was one
       that would never have passed unobserved. His short upper lip indicated a good breed; and his
       chestnut curls clustered over his open brow, while his shirt collar thrown over his shoulders
       was unrestrained by handkerchief or ribbon. Add to this, a limber and graceful figure, which
       the jacket
        /  of his boyish dress exhibited to great advantage.  
  Just as the youth, mounted on a chair, was adjusting the portrait of the Duke which he had
       observed to be awry, the gentleman for whom he had been all this time waiting entered the
       room.  
  "Floreat Etona!" hastily exclaimed the gentleman in a sharp voice, "you are setting the
       Duke to rights. I have left you a long time a prisoner; but I found them so busy here, that I
       myself made my escape with difficulty."  
  He who uttered these words was a man of middle size and age, originally in all probability
       of a spare habit, but now a little inclined to corpulency. Baldness perhaps contributed to
       the spiritual expression of a brow, which was however essentially intellectual, and gave some
       character of openness to a countenance which, though not ill-favoured, was unhappily stamped
       by a sinister character that was not to be mistaken. His manner was easy, but rather
       audacious
        /  than well-bred. Indeed, while a visage which might otherwise be described as handsome
       was spoilt by a dishonest glance, so a demeanour that was by no means deficient in
       self-possession and facility, was tainted by an innate vulgarity, which in the long run,
       though seldom, yet surely, developed itself.  
  The youth had jumped off his chair on the entrance of the gentleman, and then taking up his
       hat, said:  
  "Shall we go to grand-papa now, sir?"  
  "By all means, my dear boy," said the gentleman, putting his arm within that of the youth;
       and they were just on the point of leaving the waiting-room, when the door was suddenly
       thrown open and two individuals, in a state of very great excitement, rushed into the
       apartment.  
  "Rigby—Rigby!" they both exclaimed at the same moment. "By G—they're out."  
  "Who told you?"  
  "The best authority; one of themselves."  
  "Who—who?"  
 / 
  "Paul Evelyn; I met him as I passed Brookes', and he told me that Lord Grey had resigned,
       and the King had accepted his resignation."  
  But Mr. Rigby, who, though very fond of news and much interested in the present, was
       extremely jealous of any one giving him information, was sceptical. He declared that Paul
       Evelyn was always wrong; that it was morally impossible that Paul Evelyn could ever be right;
       that he knew, from the highest authority, that Lord Grey had been twice yesterday with the
       King; that on the last visit nothing was settled; that if he had been at the palace again
       to-day, he could not have been there before twelve o'clock; that it was only now one quarter
       to one; that Lord Grey would have called his colleagues together on his return; that at least
       an hour must have elapsed before anything could possibly have transpired. Then he compared
       and criticised the dates of every rumoured incident of the last twenty-four hours;
        /  (and nobody was stronger in dates than Mr. Rigby); counted even the number of stairs
       which the minister had to ascend and descend in his visit to the palace, and the time their
       mountings and dismountings must have absorbed, (detail was Mr. Rigby's forte); and finally,
       what with his dates, his private information, his knowledge of palace localities, his
       contempt for Paul Evelyn, and his confidence in himself, he succeeded in persuading his
       downcast and disheartened friends, that their comfortable intelligence had not the slightest
       foundation.  
  They all left the room together; they were in the hall; the gentlemen who brought the news
       looking somewhat depressed but Mr. Rigby gay even amid the prostration of his party, from the
       consciousness that he had most critically demolished a piece of political gossip, and
       conveyed a certain degree of mortification to a couple of his companions; when a travelling
       carriage and four with a ducal coronet drove up to the house. The door was thrown open, the
        /  steps dashed down, and a youthful noble sprang from his chariot into the hall.  
  "Good morning, Rigby," said the Duke.  
  "I see your Grace well, I am sure," said Mr. Rigby, with a very softened manner.  
  "You have heard the news, gentlemen?" he continued.  
  "What news? Yes—no—that is to say— Mr. Rigby thinks—"  
  "You know, of course, that Lord Lyndhurst is with the King?"  
  "It is impossible," said Mr. Rigby.  
  "I don't think I can be mistaken," said the Duke smiling.  
  "I will show your Grace that it is impossible," said Mr. Rigby. "Lord Lyndhurst slept at
       Wimbledon. Lord Grey could not have seen the King until twelve o'clock; it is now five
       minutes to one. It is impossible, therefore, that any message from the King could have
       reached Lord Lyndhurst in time for his Lordship to be at the palace at this moment."  
 / 
  "But my authority is a very high one," said the Duke.  
  "Authority is a phrase," said Mr. Rigby; "we must look to time and place, dates and
       localities, to discover the truth."  
  "Your Grace was saying that your authority—" ventured to observe Mr. Tadpole, emboldened by
       the presence of a duke, his patron, to struggle against the despotism of a Rigby, his
       tyrant.  
  "Was the highest," rejoined the Duke smiling; "for it was Lord Lyndhurst himself. I came up
       from Nuneham this morning, passed his Lordship's house in Hyde Park Place as he was getting
       into his carriage in full dress, stopped my own, and learned in a breath, that the Whigs were
       out, and that the King had sent for the Chief Baron. So I came on here at once."  
  "I always thought the country was sound at bottom," exclaimed Mr. Taper, who, under the old
       system, had sneaked into the Treasury Board.  
  Tadpole and Taper were great friends. Neither of them ever despaired of the Commonwealth.
       Even if the Reform Bill were passed, Taper was convinced that the Whigs would never prove men
       of business; and when his friends confessed among themselves that a Tory Government was for
       the future impossible, Taper would remark in a confidential whisper, that for his part he
       believed before the year was over, the Whigs would be turned out by the clerks.  
  "There is no doubt that there is considerable re-action," said Mr. Tadpole. "The infamous
       conduct of the Whigs in the Amersham case, has opened the public mind more than
       anything."  
  "Aldborough was worse," said Mr. Taper.  
  "Terrible!" said Tadpole. "They said there was no use discussing the Reform Bill in our
       house. I believe Rigby's great speech on Aldborough has done more towards the re-action than
       all the violence of all the political Unions together."  
   mildly. "'Tis a bold step on the part of the Sovereign, and I am free to say I
       could have wished it postponed; but we must support the King like men. What say you, Rigby?
       You are silent."  
  "I am thinking what an unfortunate circumstance it was for the Sovereign, the country, and
       the party, that I did not breakfast with Lord Lyndhurst this morning, as I was nearly doing,
       instead of going down to Eton."  
  "To Eton, and why to Eton?"  
  "For the sake of my young friend here; Lord Monmouth's grandson. By the bye, you are
       kinsmen. Let me present to your Grace—   Mr. Coningsby   ."  
  
  CHAPTER II.  
  The political agitation which for a year and a half had shaken England to its
       centre, received if possible an increase to its intensity and virulence, when it was known in
       the early part of the month of May, 1832, that the Prime Minister had tendered his
       resignation to the King, which resignation had been graciously accepted.  
   was the immediate cause of this startling event. The Lords had previously
       consented to the second reading of the Bill with the view of preventing that large increase
       of their numbers with which they had been long menaced; rather indeed by mysterious rumours
       than by any official declaration; but nevertheless in a manner which had carried conviction
       to no inconsiderable portion of the Opposition that the threat was not without
       foundation.  
  During the progress of the Bill through the Lower House, the journals which were looked
       upon as the organs of the ministry, had announced with unhesitating confidence, that Lord
       Grey was armed with what was then called a   carte blanche   to create any number of
       peers necessary to insure its success. Nor were public journalists under the control of the
       ministry, and whose statements were never contradicted, the sole authorities for this
       prevailing belief.  
   not connected with it by any official tie, had unequivocally stated in their
       places that the Sovereign had not resisted the advice of his counsellors to create peers, if
       such creation were required to carry into effect what was then styled "the great national
       measure." In more than one instance, ministers had been warned, that, if they did not
       exercise that power with prompt energy, they might deserve impeachment. And these intimations
       and announcements had been made in the presence of leading members of the government, and had
       received from them at least the sanction of their silence.  
   had thus obtained a title at that moment rife in everybody's mouth—the title of
       "   the Waverers   ."  
  Notwithstanding therefore the opposition of the Duke of Wellington and of Lord Lyndhurst,
       the Waverers carried the second reading of the Reform Bill; and then scared at the
       consequences of their own headstrong timidity, they went in a fright to the Duke and his able
       adviser to extricate them from the inevitable result of their own conduct. The ultimate
       device of these distracted councils, where daring and poltroonery, principle and expediency,
       public spirit and private intrigue, all threw an ingredient in the turbulent spell; was the
       celebrated and successful amendment to which we have referred.  
   hesitating opponent. Lord Grey hastened to the Palace.  
   the hand of a master, had eventually broken up the health of its victim, who
       died of a fever in a foreign country, where he had sought some refuge from his creditors.  
   very decently exist upon in a small market town in the county of
       Westmoreland.  
   leaf. His honours were proclaimed in the London Gazette, and her decease was not
       even noticed in the County Chronicle; but the altars of Nemesis are beneath every outraged
       roof, and the death of this unhappy lady, apparently without an earthly friend or an earthly
       hope, desolate and deserted, and dying in obscure poverty, was not forgotten.  
   a mother, even if he never saw her. Other boys went to see their mothers; he at
       least could talk of his. Now he was alone. His grandfather was to him only a name. Lord
       Monmouth resided almost constantly abroad, and during his rare visits to England had found no
       time or inclination to see the orphan with whom he felt no sympathy. Even the death of the
       boy's mother, and the consequent arrangements, were notified to his master by a stranger. The
       letter which brought the sad intelligence was from Mr. Rigby. It was the first time that name
       had been known to Coningsby.  
   could instruct him in matters of detail, which Mr. Rigby made amusing. Rigby was
       not a professional man indeed, his origin, education, early pursuits, and studies, were
       equally obscure; but he had contrived in good time to squeeze himself into Parliament, by
       means which no one could ever comprehend, and then set up to be a perfect man of business.
       The world took him at his word, for he was bold, acute, and voluble; with no thought, but a
       good deal of desultory information; and though destitute of all imagination and noble
       sentiment, was blessed with a vigorous, mendacious fancy, fruitful in small expedients, and
       never happier than when devising shifts for great men's scrapes.  
   he never wrote, and articles in reviews to which it was whispered he had
       contributed, Rigby, who had already intrigued himself into a subordinate office, met with
       Lord Monmonth.  
  He was just the animal that Lord Monmouth wanted, for Lord Monmouth always looked upon
       human nature with the callous eye of a jockey. He surveyed Rigby, and he determined to buy
       him. He bought him; with his clear head, his indefatigable industry, his audacious tongue,
       and his ready and unscrupulous pen; with all his dates, all his lampoons; all his private
       memoirs, and all his political intrigues. It was a good purchase. Rigby became a great
       personage, and Lord Monmouth's man.  
   affected rather the graceful dignity of the governor than the duties of a tutor.
       The boy was recalled from his homely, rural school, where he had been well grounded by a
       hard-working curate, and affectionately tended by the curate's unsophisticated wife. He was
       sent to a fashionable school preparatory to Eton, where he found about two hundred youths of
       noble families and connexions lodged in a magnificent villa, that had once been the retreat
       of a minister, superintended by a sycophantic Doctor of Divinity, already well beneficed, and
       not despairing of a bishopric by favouring the children of great nobles. The Doctor's lady
       clothed in cashmeres, sometimes inquired after their health, and occasionally received a
       report as to their linen.  
   one could lash a woman like Rigby) cut up a rising genius whose politics were
       different from his own, or scarified some unhappy wretch who had brought his claims before
       parliament, proving by garbled extracts from official correspondence that no one could refer
       to, that the malcontent, instead of being a victim, was on the contrary a defaulter. Tadpole
       and Taper would back Rigby for a "slashing reply" against the field. Here too at the end of a
       busy week, he found it occasionally convenient to entertain a clever friend or two of
       equivocal reputation, with whom he had become acquainted in former days of equal brotherhood.
       No one was more faithful to his early friends than Mr. Rigby; particularly if they could
       write a squib.  
   written by the authors of the "Rejected Addresses," and it began, "My dear young
       friend." This polished composition, so full of good feeling and comprehensive views, and all
       in the best taste, was not published. It was only privately printed and a few thousand copies
       were distributed among select personages as an especial favour and mark of high
       consideration. Each copy given away seemed to Rigby like a certificate of character, a
       property which like all men of dubious repute he thoroughly appreciated. Rigby intrigued very
       much that the head-master of Eton should adopt his discourse as a class book. For this
       purpose he dined with the Doctor; told him several anecdotes of the King, which intimated
       personal influence at Windsor; but the head-master was immovable; and so Mr. Rigby was
       obliged to be content by his Letter on History being canonized as a classic in the
       Preparatory Seminary, where the individual to whom it was addressed was a scholar.  
   Whitehall. Compared with his former forlorn existence, these were happy days
       when he was placed under the gallery as a member's son, or went to the play with the
       butler!  
  When Coningsby had attained his twelfth year, an order was received from Lord Monmouth who
       was at Rome, that he should go at once to Eton. This was the first great epoch of his life.
       There never was a youth who entered into that wonderful little world with more eager zest
       than Coningsby. Nor was it marvellous.  
   the energetic groups, the individual mind that leads, conquers, controls; the
       emulation and the affection; the noble strife and the tender sentiment; the daring exploit
       and the dashing scrape; the passion that pervades our life, and breathes in everything, from
       the aspiring study to the inspiring sport—oh! what hereafter can spur the brain and touch the
       heart like this; can give us a world so deeply and variously interesting; a life so full of
       quick and bright excitement—passed in a scene so fair!  
  
  CHAPTER III.  
   never wanting in energy, when his own interests were concerned, immediately
       crossed the Alps, and travelled rapidly to England. He indulged a hope that the weight of his
       presence and the influence of his strong character, which was at once shrewd and courageous,
       might induce his friends to relinquish their half measure, a course to which his nature was
       very repugnant. At all events, if they persisted in their intention, and the Bill went into
       committee, his presence was indispensable, for in that stage of a parliamentary proceeding
       proxies become ineffective.  
   plucked in the Forum. We live in an age of prudence. The leaders of the people,
       now, generally follow. The truth is, the peers were in a fright. 'Twas a pity; there is
       scarcely a less dignified entity than a patrician in a panic.  
  Among the most intimate companions of Coningsby at Eton, was Lord Henry Sydney, his
       kinsman. Coningsby had frequently passed his holidays of late at Beaumanoir, the seat of the
       Duke, Lord Henry's father. The Duke sate next to Lord Monmouth during the debate on the
       enfranchising question, and to wile away the time, and from kindness of disposition spoke,
       and spoke with warmth and favour, of his grandson. The polished Lord Monmouth bowed as if he
       were much gratified by this notice of one so dear to him. He had too much tact to admit that
       he had never yet seen his grandchild; but he asked some questions as to his progress and
       pursuits, his tastes and habits, which intimated the interest of an affectionate
       relative.  
  Nothing, however, was ever lost upon Lord Monmouth. No one had a more retentive memory, or
       a more observant mind. And the next day, when he received Mr. Rigby at his morning levee,
       (Lord Monmouth performed this ceremony in the high style of the old court, and welcomed his
       visitors in bed), he said with imperturbable calmness, and as if he had been talking of
       trying a new horse, "Rigby, I should like to see the boy at Eton."  
  There might be some objection to grant leave to Coningsby at this moment; but it was a rule
       with Mr. Rigby never to make difficulties, or at least to persuade his patron, that he, and
       he only, could remove them. He immediately undertook that the boy should be forthcoming, and,
       notwithstanding the excitement of the moment, he went off next morning to fetch him.  
   ordered the servant to drive immediately to the head-quarters of the party;
       where a permanent committee watched every phasis of the impending revolution; and where every
       member of the opposition of note and trust was instantly admitted to receive or to impart
       intelligence.  
   together by the most beautiful affections. He could not forget how Henry Sydney
       was embraced by his sisters when he returned home; what frank and fraternal love existed
       between his cousin and his elder brother; how affectionately the kind Duke had welcomed his
       son once more to the house where they had both been born; and the dim eyes and saddened
       brows, and tones of tenderness which rather looked than said farewell, when they went back to
       Eton.  
   materials; and Coningsby was picturing to himself a beneficent and venerable
       gentleman pressing to his breast an agitated youth, when his reverie was broken by the
       carriage stopping before the gates of Monmouth House.  
  The gates were opened by a gigantic Swiss, and the carriage rolled into a huge court yard.
       At its end, Coningsby beheld a Palladian palace with wings and colonnades encircling the
       court.  
   through an ante-chamber into a small saloon of beautiful proportion, and
       furnished in a brilliant and delicate taste.  
  "You will find more to amuse you here than where we were before," said Mr. Rigby, "and I
       shall not be nearly so long absent." So saying, he entered into an inner apartment.  
  The walls of the saloon, which were covered with light blue satin, held in silver pannels
       portraits of beautiful women painted by Boucher. Couches and easy chairs of every shape
       invited in every quarter to luxurious repose, while amusement was afforded by tables covered
       with caricatures, French novels, and endless miniatures of foreign dancers, princesses, and
       Sovereigns.  
   the door opened—he started—grew pale—he thought it was his grandfather; it was
       not even Mr. Rigby. It was Lord Monmouth's valet.  
  "Monsieur Konigby?"  
  "My name is Coningsby," said the boy.  
  "Milor is ready to receive you," said the valet.  
  Coningsby sprang forward with that desperation which the scaffold requires. His face was
       pale; his hand was moist; his heart beat with tumult. He had occasionally been summoned by
       Dr. Keate; that too was awful work, but compared with the present, a morning visit. Music,
       artillery, the roar of cannon, and the blare of trumpets, may urge a man on to a forlorn
       hope; ambition, one's constituents, the hell of previous failure, may prevail on us to do a
       more desperate thing—speak in the House of Commons; but there are some situations in life,
       such for instance as entering the room of a dentist, when the prostration of the nervous
       system is absolute.  
   desolate was to find a benefactor, the forlorn a friend, the orphan a parent;
       when the youth, after a childhood of adversity, was to be formally received into the bosom of
       the noble house from which he had been so long estranged, and at length to assume that social
       position to which his lineage entitled him. Manliness might support, affection might soothe,
       the happy anguish of such a meeting; but it was undoubtedly one of those situations which
       stir up the deep fountains of our natures, and before which the conventional proprieties of
       our ordinary manners instantaneously vanish.  
   hand rested on an ivory stick. Lord Monmouth was in height above the midde size,
       but somewhat portly and corpulent. His countenance was strongly marked; sagacity on the brow,
       sensuality in the mouth and jaw. His head was bald, but there were remains of the rich brown
       locks on which he once prided himself. His large deep blue eye, madid and yet piercing,
       showed that the secretions of his brain were apportioned, half to voluptuousness, half to
       common sense. But his general mien was truly grand; full of a natural nobility, of which no
       one was more sensible. Lord Monmouth was not in dishabille; on the contrary, his costume was
       exact, and even careful. Rising as we have mentioned when his grandson entered, and leaning
       with his left hand on his ivory cane, he made Coningsby such a bow as Louis Quatorze might
       have bestowed on the ambassador of the United Provinces. Then extending his right hand, which
       the boy tremblingly touched, Lord Monmouth said:  
  "How do you like Eton?"  
  This contrast to the reception which he had imagined, hoped, feared, paralysed the reviving
       energies of young Coningsby. He felt stupified; he looked almost aghast. In the chaotic
       tumult of his mind, his memory suddenly seemed to receive some miraculous inspiration.
       Mysterious phrases heard in his earliest boyhood, unnoticed then, long since forgotten, rose
       to his ear. Who was this grandfather, seen not before, seen now for the first time? Where was
       the intervening link of blood between him and this superb and icy being? The boy sank into
       the chair which had been placed for him, and leaning on the table burst into tears.  
   was tender-hearted like his father. Another tender-hearted Coningsby!
       Unfortunate family! Degenerate race! He decided in his mind that Coningsby must be provided
       for in the Church, and looked at Mr. Rigby, whose principal business it always was to
       disembarrass his patron from the disagreeable.  
  Mr. Rigby instantly came forward and adroitly led the boy into the adjoining apartment,
       Lord Monmouth's bed-chamber, closing the door of the dressing-room behind him.  
  "My dear young friend," said Mr. Rigby, "what is all this?"  
  A sob the only answer,  
  "What can be the matter?" said Mr. Rigby.  
  "I was thinking," said Coningsby, "of poor mamma!"  
  "Hush!" said Mr. Rigby, "Lord Monmouth never likes to hear of people who are dead; so you
       must take care never to mention your mother or your father."  
  In the meantime Lord Monmouth had decided on the fate of Coningsby. The Marquess thought he
       could read characters by a glance, and in general he was very successful; for his natural
       sagacity had been nurtured by great experience. His grandson was not to his taste; amiable,
       no doubt, but a spooney.  
   bosom what burning love, what intense ambition, what avarice, what lust of
       power; envy that fiends might emulate, hate that man might fear!  
  
  CHAPTER IV.  
  "   Come   ," said Mr. Rigby, when Coningsby was somewhat composed, "come with me, and
       we will see the house."  
  So they descended once more the private staircase, and again entered the vestibule.  
   tapestry and the gorgeous products of foreign looms; filled with choice pictures
       and creations of curious art; cabinets that sovereigns might envy, and colossal vases of
       malachite presented by Emperors. Coningsby alternately gazed up to ceilings glowing with
       colour and with gold, and down upon carpets bright with the fancies and vivid with the tints
       of Aubusson and of Axminster.  
  "This grandfather of mine is a great prince," thought Coningsby, as musing he stood before
       a portrait in which he recognised the features of the being from whom he had so recently and
       so strangely parted. There he stood, Philip Augustus, Marquess of Monmouth, in his robes of
       estate, with his new coronet on a table near him, a despatch lying at hand that indicated the
       special mission of high ceremony of which he had been the illustrious envoy, and the garter
       beneath his knee.  
   boy had now quite recovered himself. "Some luncheon will do you no harm after
       our drive," and he opened the door of another apartment.  
  It was a pretty room, adorned with a fine picture of the chase: at a round table in the
       centre sate two ladies interested in the meal to which Rigby had alluded.  
  "Ah, Mr. Rigby!" said the eldest, yet young and beautiful, and speaking, though with
       fluency, in a foreign accent, "come and tell me some news. Have you seen Milor?" and then she
       threw a scrutinizing glance from a dark flashing eye at his companion.  
  "Let me present to your Highness," said Rigby with an air of some ceremony, "Mr.
       Coningsby."  
  "My dear young friend," said the Lady, extending her white hand with an air of joyous
       welcome, "this is Lucretia, my daughter. We love you already. Lord Monmouth will be so
       charmed to see you. What beautiful eyes he has, Mr. Rigby! Quite like Milor."  
  The young lady, who was really more youthful than Coningsby, but of a form and stature so
       developed, that she appeared almost a woman, bowed to the guest with some ceremony, and a
       faint sullen smile, and then proceeded with her chicken-pie.  
  "You must be so hungry after your drive," said the elder lady, placing Coningsby at her
       side, and herself filling his plate.  
   It was evident that he had made a favourable impression on her Highness, for
       ever and anon she put a truffle or some small delicacy in his plate, and insisted upon his
       taking some particular confectionary, because it was a favourite of her own. When she rose,
       she said:  
  "In ten minutes the carriage will be at the door; and if you like, my dear young friend,
       you shall be our beau."  
  "There is nothing I should like so much," said Coningsby.  
  "Ah!" said the lady with the sweetest smile, "he is frank."  
  The ladies bowed and retired; Mr. Rigby returned to the Marquess, and the groom of the
       chambers led Coningsby to his room.  
   Lucretia was the sole offspring. He was a man dissolute, and devoted to play;
       and cared for nothing much but his pleasures and billiards, in which latter he was esteemed
       unrivalled. According to some, in a freak of passion, according to others, to cancel a
       gambling debt, he had united himself to his present wife, whose origin was obscure; but with
       whom he contrived to live on terms of apparent cordiality, for she was much admired, and made
       the society of her husband sought by those who contributed to his enjoyment. Among these
       especially figured the Marquess of Monmouth, between whom and Prince Colonna the world
       recognised as existing the most intimate and entire friendship, so that his Highness and his
       family were frequent guests under the roof of the English nobleman, and now accompanied him
       on a visit to England.  
  
  CHAPTER V.  
   hours have passed, the country will be in a state of fearful crisis. And how can
       it be otherwise? Is it not a truth, that the subtle Chief Baron has been closeted one whole
       hour with the King; that shortly after, with thoughtful brow and compressed lip, he was
       marked in his daring chariot entering the court-yard of Apsley House. Great was the panic at
       Brookes', wild the hopes of Carlton Terrace; All the gentlemen who expected to have been made
       peers, perceived that the country was going to be given over to a rapacious oligarchy.  
  In the meantime, Tadpole and Taper, who had never quitted for an instant the mysterious
       head-quarters of the late opposition, were full of hopes and fears, and asked many questions
       which they chiefly answered themselves.  
  "I wonder what Lord Lyndhurst will say to the King," said Taper.  
  "He has plenty of pluck," said Tadpole.  
  "I almost wish now that Rigby had breakfasted with him this morning," said Taper.  
  "If the King be firm, and the country sound," said Tadpole, "and Lord Monmouth keep his
       boroughs, I should not wonder if Rigby were made a privy counsellor."  
  "There is no precedent for an under secretary being a privy counsellor," said Taper.  
  "But we live in revolutionary times," said Tadpole.  
  "Gentlemen," said the groom of the chambers, in a loud voice, entering the room, "I am
       desired to state that the Duke of Wellington is with the King."  
  "There   is   a Providence!" exclaimed an agitated gentleman, the patent of whose
       intended peerage had not been signed the day that the Duke had quitted office in 1830.  
  "I always thought the King would be firm," said Mr. Tadpole.  
  "I wonder who will have the India Board," said Taper.  
   and excitement; they were immediately surrounded.  
  "Is it true? Quite true; not the slightest doubt. Saw him myself. Not at all hissed;
       certainly not hooted. Perhaps a little hissed. One fellow really cheered him. Saw him myself.
       Say what they like there   is   re-action. But Constitution Hill they say? Well, there
       was a sort of inclination to a row on Constitution Hill; but the Duke quite firm; pistols and
       carriage doors bolted."  
  Such may give a faint idea of the anxious inquiries, and the satisfactory replies that were
       occasioned by the entrance of this group.  
  "Up guards and at them!" exclaimed Tadpole, rubbing his hands in a fit of patriotic
       enthusiasm.  
   chit-chat the tone of public or party feeling on the 'crisis.' Then it was known
       that the Duke had returned from the King, having accepted the charge of forming an
       administration. An administration to do what? Portentous question! Were concessions to be
       made? And if so, what? Was it altogether impossible, and too late,   stare super vias
        antiquas   ? Questions altogether above your Tadpoles and your Tapers, whose idea of the
       necessities of the age was that they themselves should be in office.  
   novels; and without any affectation of tastes which he did not possess, was
       looked upon by every singer and dancer in Europe, as their natural champion. The secret of
       his strong character and great influence was his self-composure, which an earthquake or a
       Reform Bill could not disturb, and which in him was the result of temperament and experience.
       He was an intimate acquaintance of Lord Monmouth, for they had many tastes in common; were
       both men of considerable, and in some degree similar abilities; and were the two greatest
       proprietors of close boroughs in the country.  
  "Do you dine at Monmouth House to-day?" inquired Lord Eskdale of Mr. Rigby.  
  "Where I hope to meet your Lordship. The Whig papers are very subdued," continued Mr.
       Rigby.  
  "Ah! they have not the cue yet," said Lord Eskdale.  
  "And what do you think of affairs?" inquired his companion.  
  "I think the hounds are too hot to hark off now," said Lord Eskdale.  
  "There is one combination," said Rigby, who seemed meditating an attack on Lord Eskdale's
       button.  
  "Give us it at dinner," said Lord Eskdale; who knew his man, and made an adroit movement
       forwards as if he were very anxious to see the Globe newspaper.  
   play, had been his colleague in the House of Commons; and was still one of his
       nominees. Mr. Ormsby was a millionnaire, which Lord Monmouth liked. He liked his companions
       to be very rich or very poor; to be his equals, able to play with him at high stakes, or join
       him in a great speculation; or to be his tools, and to amuse and serve him. There was nothing
       which he despised and disliked so much as a moderate fortune.  
   intellectual illustrations were found there blended with rank and high station.
       Rigby loved to patronize; to play the minister unbending, and seeking relief from the cares
       of council in the society of authors, artists, and men of science. He liked Dukes to dine
       with him and hear him scatter his audacious criticisms to Sir Thomas or Sir Humphrey. They
       went away astounded by the powers of their host, who had he not fortunately devoted those
       powers to their party, must apparently have rivalled Vandyke, or discovered the Safety
       lamp.  
   Gay, wished Gay also to be their guest. Rigby was very jealous of this, but it
       was inevitable; still by constant manoeuvre, by intimations of some exercise some day or
       other of substantial patronage in his behalf, by a thousand little arts by which he carved
       out work for Gay which prevented him often accepting invitations to great houses in the
       country, by judicious loans of small sums on Lucian's notes of hand and other analogous
       devices, Rigby contrived to keep the wit in a very fair state of bondage and dependence.  
   hisacid squibs, and his malicious paragraphs, and, what Tadpole called, his
       "slashing" articles.  
   the writer was of opinion he had made a point, you may be sure the hit was in
       italics, that last resource of the Forcible Feebles. He handled a particular in chronology as
       if he were proving an alibi at the Criminal Court. The censure was coarse without being
       strong, and vindictive when it would have been sarcastic. Now and then there was a passage
       which aimed at a higher flight, and nothing can be conceived more unlike genuine feeling, or
       more offensive to pure taste. And yet perhaps the most ludicrous characteristic of these
       factious gallimaufreys, was an occasional assumption of the high moral and admonitory tone,
       which when we recurred to the general spirit of the discourse and were apt to recall the
       character of its writer, irresistibly reminded one of Mrs. Cole and her prayer book.  
   that his Lordship should have the best in the market, and that he should have
       the credit of furnishing the article. As a reward, therefore, for many past services and a
       fresh claim to his future exertions, Rigby one day broke to Gay that the hour had at length
       arrived when the highest object of reasonable ambition on his part, and the fulfilment of one
       of Rigby's long cherished and dearest hopes were alike to be realized. Gay was to be
       presented to Lord Monmouth and dine at Monmouth House.  
  The acquaintance was a successful one; very agreeable to both parties. Gay became an
       habitual guest of Lord Monmouth when his patron was in England; and in his absence, received
       frequent and substantial marks of his kind recollection, for Lord Monmouth was generous to
       those who amused him.  
   and the blade of which he broke in the operation, only reached the drawing-room
       as the figure of his grandfather, leaning on his ivory cane and following his guests, was
       just visible in the distance. He was soon overtaken. Perceiving Coningsby, Lord Monmouth made
       him a bow, not so formal a one as in the morning, but still a bow, and said, "I hope you
       liked your drive."  
  
  CHAPTER VI.  
  A   Little   dinner, not more than the Muses, with all the guests clever, and some
       pretty, offers human life and human nature under very favourable circumstances. In the
       present instance too, every one was anxious to please, for the host was entirely well-bred,
       never selfish in little things, and always contributed his quota to the general fund of
       polished sociability.  
   be not a L'Espinasse or a De Staël, is animating.  
  Nevertheless, owing probably to the absorbing powers of the forbidden subject, there were
       moments when it seemed that a pause was impending, and Mr. Ormsby, an old hand, seized one of
       these critical instants to address a good-natured question to Coningsby, whose acquaintance
       he had already cultivated by taking wine with him.  
  "And how do you like Eton?" asked Mr. Ormsby.  
  It was the identical question which had been presented to Coningsby in the memorable
       interview of the morning, and which had received no reply; or rather had produced on his part
       a sentimental ebullition that had absolutely destined or doomed him to the church.  
  "I should like to see the fellow who did   not   like Eton," said Coningsby, briskly,
       determined this time to be very brave.  
   place," said Mr. Ormsby, touched by a pensive reminiscence. "One can get a good
       bed and bottle of port at the Christopher, still?"  
  "You had better come and try, Sir," said Coningsby. "If you will come some day and dine
       with me at the Christopher, I will give you such a bottle of Champagne as you never tasted
       yet."  
  The Marquess looked at him, but said nothing.  
  "Ah! I liked a dinner at the Christopher," said Mr. Ormsby, "after mutton, mutton, mutton
       every day, it was not a bad thing."  
  "We had venison for dinner every week last season," said Coningsby, "Buckhurst had it sent
       up from his park. But I don't care for dinner. Breakfast is my lounge."  
  "Ah! those little rolls and pats of butter!" said Mr. Ormsby. "Short commons though. What
       do you think we did in my time?—We used to send over the way to get a mutton chop."  
   breakfast," said Coningsby, "with a pound of Castle's sausages!"  
  "What Buckhurst is that, Harry?" inquired Lord Monmouth, in a tone of some interest, and
       for the first time calling him by his christian name.  
  "Sir Charles Buckhurst, Sir, a Berkshire man; Shirley Park is his place."  
  "Why that must be Charley's son, Eskdale," said Lord Monmouth: "I had no idea he could be
       so young."  
  "He married late you know, and had nothing but daughters for a long time."  
  "Well, I hope there will be no Reform Bill for Eton," said Lord Monmouth, musingly.  
  The servants had now retired.  
  "I think Lord Monmouth," said Mr. Rigby, "we must ask permission to drink one toast
       to-day."  
  "Nay, I will myself give it," he replied. "Madame Colonna, you will I am sure join us when
       we drink—   the Duke   !"  
  "Ah! what a man!" exclaimed the Princess. "What a pity it is you have a House of Commons
       here. England would be the greatest country in the world if it were not for that House of
       Commons. It makes so much confusion!"  
  "Don't abuse our property," said Lord Eskdale, "Lord Monmouth and I have still twenty votes
       of that same body between us."  
  "And there is a combination," said Rigby, "by which you may still keep them."  
  "Ah! now for Rigby's combination?" said Lord Eskdale.  
  "The only thing that can save this country," said Rigby, "is a coalition on a sliding
       scale."  
  "You had better buy up the Birmingham Union and the other bodies," said Lord Monmouth, "I
       believe it might all be done for two or three hundred thousand pounds; and the newspapers
       too. Pitt would have settled this business long ago."  
  "Well, at any rate we are in," said Rigby, "and we must do something."  
  "I should like to see Grey's list of new peers," said Lord Eskdale. "They say there are
       several members of our club in it."  
  "And the claims to the honour are so opposite," said Lucian Gay, "one on account of his
       large estate; another, because he has none; one because he has a well-grown family to
       perpetuate the title; another, because he has no heir, and no power of ever obtaining
       one."  
  "I wonder how he will form his cabinet?" said Lord Monmouth, "the old story won't do."  
  "I hear that Baring is to be one of the new cards; they say it will please in the city,"
       said Lord Eskdale. "I suppose they will pick out of hedge and ditch everything that has ever
       had the semblance of liberalism."  
  "Affairs in my time were never so complicated," said Mr. Ormsby.  
  "Nay, it appears to me to lie in a nutshell," said Lucian Gay, "one party wishes to keep
       their old boroughs, and the other to get their new peers."  
  
  CHAPTER VII.  
   might have been some compensation for the parliamentary influence of which they
       had been deprived. It is difficult to recognise in this premature effort of the Anti-Reform
       leader to thrust himself again into the conduct of public affairs, any indications of the
       prescient judgment which might have been expected from such a quarter. It savoured rather of
       restlessness than of energy; and while it proved in its progress not only an ignorance on his
       part of the public mind, but of the feelings of his own party, it terminated under
       circumstances which were humiliating to the Crown, and painfully significant of the future
       position of the House of Lords in the new constitutional scheme.  
   civil affairs, where results are not immediate; in diplomacy and in the
       management of deliberative assemblies, where there is much intervening time and many
       counteracting causes; this velocity of decision, this fitful and precipitate action, is often
       productive of considerable embarrassment, and sometimes of terrible discomfiture. It is
       remarkable that men celebrated for military prudence are often found to be headstrong
       statesmen. A great general in civil life is frequently and strangely the creature of impulse;
       influenced in his political movements by the last snatch of information; and often the
       creature of the last aid-de-camp who has his ear.  
   by the utmost decision, promptness and energy. These were all wanting: some were
       afraid to follow the bold example of their leader; many were disinclined. In eight and forty
       hours it was known there was a "hitch."  
   the State; virtually announced its supremacy; revealed the forlorn position of
       the House of Lords under the new arrangement; and seemed to lay for ever the fluttering
       phantom of regal prerogative.  
   the task in discomfiture and despair, and alleges as the only and sufficient
       reason of his utter and hopeless defeat, that the House of Commons had come to a vote which
       ran counter to the contemplated exercise of the prerogative.  
  From that moment power passed from the House of Lords to another assembly. But if the peers
       have ceased to be magnificoes, may it not also happen that the Sovereign may cease to be a
       Doge? It is not impossible that the political movements of our time, which seem on the
       surface to have a tendency to democracy, have in reality a monarchical bias.  
  In less than a fortnight's time the House of Lords, like James II; having abdicated their
       functions by absence, the Reform Bill passed; the ardent monarch, who a few months before had
       expressed his readiness to go down to parliament, if necessary, in a hackney-coach to assist
       its progress, now declining personally to give his assent to its provisions.  
  In the protracted discussions to which this celebrated measure gave rise, nothing is more
       remarkable than the perplexities into which the speakers of both sides are thrown, when they
       touch upon the nature of the representative principle. On one hand it was maintained, that
       under the old system the people were virtually represented; while on the other, it was
       triumphantly urged, that if the principle be conceded, the people should not be virtually,
       but actually represented. But who are the people? And where are you to draw a line? And why
       should there be any? It was urged that a contribution to the taxes was the constitutional
       qualification for the suffrage. But we have established a system of taxation in this country
       of so remarkable a nature, that the beggar who chews his quid as he sweeps a crossing, is
       contributing to the imposts. Is he to have a vote? He is one of the people, and he yields his
       quota to the public burthens.  
   confounding conclusions, it is singular that no member of either house should
       have recurred to the original character of these popular assemblies, which have always
       prevailed among the northern nations. We still retain in the antique phraseology of our
       statutes, the term which might have beneficially guided a modern Reformer in his
       re-constructive labours.  
  When the crowned Northman consulted on the welfare of his kingdom, he assembled the
          Estates   This Third Estate was so numerous, that convenience suggested its appearance by
       representation; while the others, more limited, appeared, and still appear, personally. The
       Third Estate was reconstructed as circumstances developed themselves. It was a Reform of
       Parliament when the towns were summoned.  
  In treating the House of the Third Estate as the House of the People, and not as the House
       of a privileged class, the Ministry and Parliament of 1831 virtually conceded the principle
       of Universal Suffrage. In this point of view the ten pound franchise was an arbitrary,
       irrational and impolitic qualification. It had, indeed, the merit of simplicity, and so had
       the constitutions of Abbé Siéyès. But its immediate and inevitable result was Chartism.  
   elements in its reconstruction, they had sought, on the contrary, various and
       varying materials which would have neutralised the painful predominance of any particular
       interest in the new scheme, and prevented those banded jealousies which have been its
       consequences, the nation would have found itself in a secure condition. Another class not
       less numerous than the existing one, and invested with privileges not less important, would
       have been added to the public estates of the realm; and the bewildering phrase "the People"
       would have remained what it really is, a term of natural philosophy, and not of political
       science.  
   lips of Mr. Rigby and his friends that England was for ever lost, the assembled
       guests still contrived to do justice to his grandfather's excellent dinners; nor did the
       impending ruin that awaited them prevent the Princess Colonna from going to the opera,
       whither she very good-naturedly took Coningsby. Madame Colonna indeed gave such gratifying
       accounts of her dear young friend, that Coningsby became daily a greater favourite with Lord
       Monmouth, who cherished the idea that his grandson had inherited not merely the colour of his
       eyes, but something of his shrewd and fearless spirit.  
   her step-mother, who seemed seldom to address her but to rate and chide;
       Lucretia never replied, but looked dogged. Her father, the Prince, did not compensate for
       this treatment. The memory of her mother, whom he had greatly disliked, did not soften his
       heart. He was a man still young; slender, not tall; very handsome, but worn; a haggard
       Antinous; his beautiful hair daily thinning; his dress rich and effeminate; many jewels, much
       lace; he seldom spoke, but was polished, though moody.  
   meant to attend; and informed his grandson that he should order that in future a
       proper supply of game and venison should be forwarded to Eton for the use of himself and his
       friends.  
  
  CHAPTER VIII.  
   whether the visit had been a success—here were materials for almost endless
       inquiry. And, indeed, to do them justice, the last question was not the least exciting to
       them; for the deep and cordial interest which all felt in Coningsby's welfare far outweighed
       the curiosity which, under ordinary circumstances, they would have experienced on the return
       of one of their companions from an unusual visit to London. The report of their friend
       imparted to them unbounded satisfaction; when they learned that his relative was a splendid
       fellow; that he had been loaded with kindness and favours; that Monmouth House, the wonders
       of which he rapidly sketched, was hereafter to be his home; that Lord Monmouth was coming
       down to Montem; that Coningsby was to order any dress he liked, build a new boat if he chose,
       and, finally, had been tipped in a manner worthy of a Marquess and a grandfather.  
   will not half like it, Coningsby: but, old fellow, I had no idea you would be
       back this morning, I have asked Millbank, to breakfast here."  
  A cloud stole over the clear brow of Coningsby.  
  "It was my fault," said the amiable Henry Sydney; "but I really wanted to be civil to
       Millbank and as you were not here, I put Buckhurst up to ask him."  
  "Well," said Coningsby, as if sullenly resigned, "never mind; but why you should ask an
       infernal manufacturer!"  
  "Why the Duke always wished me to pay him some attention," said Lord Henry, mildly. "His
       family were so civil to us when we were at Manchester."  
  "Manchester, indeed!" said Coningsby; "if you knew what I did about Manchester! A pretty
       state we have been in London this week past with your Manchesters and Birminghams!"  
  "Come—come, Coningsby," said Lord Vere, the son of a Whig minister; "I am all for
       Manchester and Birmingham."  
  "It is all up with the country I can tell you," said Coningsby, with the air of one who was
       in the secret.  
  "My father says it will all go right now," rejoined Lord Vere. "I had a letter from my
       sister yesterday."  
  "They say we shall all lose our estates though," said Buckhurst; "I know I shall not give
       up mine without a fight. Shirley was besieged, you know, in the civil wars; and the rebels
       got infernally licked."  
  "I think that all the people about Beaumanoir would stand by the Duke," said Lord Henry,
       pensively.  
  "Well—you may depend upon it you will have it very soon," said Coningsby. "I know it from
       the best authority."  
  "It depends whether my father remains in," said Lord Vere. "He is the only man who can
       govern the country now. All say that."  
   a sincere expression in his countenance. He was, evidently, not extremely
       intimate with those who were now his companions. Buckhurst, and Henry Sydney, and Vere
       welcomed him cordially. He looked at Coningsby with some constraint, and then said:  
  "You have been in London, Coningsby?"  
  "Yes, I have been there during all the row."  
  "You must have had a rare lark."  
  "Yes, if having your windows broken by a mob be a rare lark. They could not break my
       grandfather's though. Monmouth House is in a court yard. All noblemen's houses should be in
       court yards."  
  "I was glad to see it all ended very well," said Millbank.  
  "It has not begun yet," said Coningsby.  
  "What?" said Millbank.  
  "Why—the revolution."  
  "The Reform Bill will prevent a revolution, my father says," said Millbank.  
  "By Jove! here's the goose," said Buckhurst.  
  At this moment there entered the room a little boy, the scion of a noble house, bearing a
       roasted goose which he had carried from the kitchen of the opposite inn, the Christopher. The
       lower boy or fag, depositing his burthen, asked his master whether he had further need of
       him, and Buckhurst after looking round the table and ascertaining that he had not, gave him
       permission to retire; but he had scarcely disappeared when his master singing out "Lower boy,
       St. John," he immediately re-entered and demanded his master's pleasure, which was, that he
       should pour some water in the tea-pot. This being accomplished, St. John really made his
       escape and retired to a pupil room, where the bullying of a tutor, because he had no
       derivations, exceeded, in all probability, the bullying of his master, had he contrived in
       his passage from the Christopher to have upset the goose or dropped the sausages.  
   in their little world, thought it must be owned that visions of palaces and
       beautiful ladies did occasionally flit over the brain of one of the company. But for him
       especially there was much of interest and novelty. So much had happened in his absence! There
       was a week's arrears for him of Eton annals. They were recounted in so fresh a spirit and in
       such vivid colours, that Coningsby lost nothing by his London visit. All the bold feats that
       had been done, and all the bright things that had been said; all the triumphs, and all the
       failures, and all the scrapes; how popular one master had made himself, and how ridiculous
       another; all was detailed with a liveliness, a candour, and a picturesque ingenuousness,
       which would have made the fortune of a Herodotus or a Froissart.  
  "I'll tell you what," said Buckhurst, "I move that after twelve is called, we five go up to
       Maidenhead."  
  "Agreed—agreed!"  
  
  CHAPTER IX.  
   affections or society of any member of the falsely held superior class.  
   had no tendency to remove the prejudice which Coningsby entertained against him,
       but its bias on the part of Millbank had a very contrary effect.  
  The influence of the individual is nowhere so sensible as at school. There the personal
       qualities strike without any intervening and counteracting causes. A gracious presence, noble
       sentiments, or a happy talent, make their way there at once, without preliminary inquiries as
       to what set they are in, or what family they are of, how much they have a year, or where they
       live. Now on no spirit had the influence of Coningsby, already the favourite, and soon
       probably to become the idol, of the school, fallen more effectually than on that of Millbank,
       though it was an influence that no one could suspect except its votary, or its victim.  
   of jealousy or despair so crushing and so keen! What tenderness and what
       devotion; what illimitable confidence; infinite revelations of inmost thoughts; what ecstatic
       present and romantic future; what bitter estrangements and what melting reconciliations; what
       scenes of wild recrimination, agitating explanations, passionate correspondence; what insane
       sensitiveness, and what frantic sensibility; what earthquakes of the heart, and whirlwinds of
       the soul, are confined in that simple phrase—a schoolboy's friendship! 'Tis some indefinite
       recollection of these mystic passages of their young emotion, that makes grey-haired men
       mourn over the memory of their schoolboy days. It is a spell that can soften the acerbity of
       political warfare, and with its witchery can call forth a sigh even amid the callous bustle
       of fashionable saloons.  
   playmate: his standard of the excellent. Yet Millbank was the very last boy in
       the school who would have had credit given him by his companions for profound and ardent
       feeling. He was not, indeed, unpopular. The favourite of the school like Coningsby, he could
       under no circumstances, ever have become; nor was he qualified to obtain that general
       graciousness among the multitude, which the sweet disposition of Henry Sydney or the gay
       profusion of Buckhurst, acquired without an effort. Millbank was not blessed with the charm
       of manner. He seemed close and cold; but he was courageous, just and inflexible; never
       bullied, and to his utmost would prevent tyranny. The little boys looked up to him as to a
       stern protector. His word throughout the school too was a proverb: and truth ranks a great
       quality among boys. In a word, Millbank was respected by those among whom he lived, and
       schoolboys scan character more nicely than men suppose.  
   his pride recoiled from gaining by any indirect means, an intimacy which to
       have obtained in a plain and express manner, would have deeply gratified him. However the
       urgent invitation of Buckhurst and Henry Sydney, and the fear that a persistance in refusal
       might be misinterpreted into churlishness, had at length brought Millbank to their
       breakfast-mess, though when he accepted their invitation, he did not apprehend that Coningsby
       would have been present.  
   adjudged the palm. Thus public opinion is formed. Some too might be seen with
       their books and exercises, intent on the inevitable and impending task. Among these, some
       unhappy wight in the remove wandering about with his hat after parochial fashion, seeking
       relief in the shape of a verse. A hard lot this, to know that you must be delivered of
       fourteen verses at least in the twenty-four hours, and to be conscious that you are pregnant
       of none. The lesser boys, urchins of tender years, clustered like flies round the baskets of
       certain vendors of sugary delicacies that rested on the Long Walk wall. The pallid
       countenance, the lack-lustre eye, the hoarse voice clogged with accumulated phlegm, indicated
       too surely the irreclaimable and hopeless votary of lollypop—the opium eater of
       schoolboys.  
  "It is settled, the match to-morrow shall be between Aquatics and Drybobs," said a senior
       boy; who was arranging a future match at cricket.  
  "But what's to be done about Fielding Major?" inquired another. "He has not paid his
       boating money, and I say he has no right to play among the Aquatics before he has paid his
       money."  
  "Oh! but we must have Fielding Major, he's such a devil of a swipe."  
  "I declare he shall not play among the Aquatics if he does not pay his boating money. It is
       an infernal shame."  
  "Let us ask Buckhurst. Where is Buckhurst?"  
  "Have you got any toffy?" inquired a dull looking little boy in a hoarse voice of one of
       the vendors of scholastic confectionary."  
  "Tom Trot, Sir."  
  "No; I want toffy."  
  "Very nice Tom Trot, Sir."  
  "No, I want toffy; I have been eating Tom Trot all day."  
  "Where is Buckhurst? We must settle about the Aquatics."  
  "Well, I for one will not play if Fielding Major plays amongst the Aquatics. That's
       settled."  
  "Oh! nonsense; he will pay his money if you ask him."  
  "I shall not ask him again. The captain duns us every day. It's an infernal shame."  
  "I say Burnham, where can one get some toffy? This fellow never has any."  
  "I'll tell you; at Barnes' on the bridge. The best toffy in the world."  
  "I'll go at once. I must have some toffy."  
  "Just help me with this verse, Collins," said one boy to another in an imploring tone,
       "that's a good fellow."  
  "Well, give it us: first syllable in   fabri   is short; three false quantities in the
       two first lines! You're a pretty one. There, I have done it for you."  
  "That's a good fellow."  
  "Any fellow seen Buckhurst?"  
  "Gone up the river with Coningsby and Henry Sydney."  
  "But he must be back by this time. I want him to make the list for the match to-morrow.
       Where the deuce can Buckhurst be?"  
  And now as rumours rise in society we know not how, so there was suddenly a flying report
       in this multitude, the origin of which no one in their alarm stopped to ascertain, that a boy
       was drowned.  
  Every heart was agitated.  
  What boy? When—where—how? Who was absent? Who had been on the river today? Buckhurst. The
       report ran that Buckhurst was drowned. Great were the trouble and consternation. Buckhurst
       was ever much liked; and now no one remembered anything but his good qualities.  
  "Who heard it was Buckhurst?" said Sedgwick, captain of the school, coming forward.  
  "I heard Bradford tell Palmer it was Buckhurst," said a little boy.  
  "Where is Bradford?"  
  "Here."  
  "What do you know about Buckhurst?"  
  "Wentworth told me that he was afraid Buckhurst was drowned. He heard it at Brocas; a
       bargeman told him about a quarter of an hour ago."  
  "Here's Wentworth—here's Wentworth!" a hundred voices exclaimed, and they formed a circle
       round him.  
  "Well, what did you hear Wentworth?" asked Sedgwick.  
  "I was at Brocas, and a bargeman told me that an Eton boy had been drowned up stream, and
       the only Eton boat up stream to-day, as I can learn is Buckhurst's. That is all."  
  There was a murmur of hope.  
  "Oh! come, come," said Sedgwick, "there is some chance. Who is with Buckhurst; who
       knows?"  
  "I saw him walk down to Brocas with Vere," said a boy.  
   with a tearful eye, "he never lets any fellow bully me."  
  "Here's Maltravers," halloed out a boy, "he knows something."  
  "Well, what do you know Maltravers?"  
  "I heard Boots at the Christopher say that an Eton boy was drowned, and that he had seen a
       person who was there."  
  "Bring Boots here," said Sedgwick.  
  Instantly a band of boys rushed over the way, and in a moment the witness was produced.  
  "What have you heard, Sam, about this accident?" said Sedgwick.  
  "Well, Sir, I heerd a young gentleman was drowned above Monkey Island," said Boots.  
  "And no name mentioned?"  
  "Well, Sir, I believe it was Mr. Coningsby."  
  A general groan of horror.  
  "Coningsby—Coningsby! By Heavens, I hope not," said Sedgwick.  
   the bargeman who told me, saw Mr. Coningsby in the lock-house laid out in
       flannels."  
  "I had sooner any fellow had been drowned than Coningsby," whispered one boy to
       another.  
  "I liked him, the best fellow at Eton," responded his companion, in a smothered tone.  
  "What a clever fellow he was!"  
  "And so deuced generous!"  
  "He would have got the medal if he had lived."  
  "And how came he to be drowned, for he was such a fine swimmer!"  
  "I heerd Mr. Coningsby was a saving another's life," continued Boots in his evidence,
       "which makes it in a manner more sorrowful."  
  "Poor Coningsby!" exclaimed a boy, bursting into tears, "I move the whole school goes into
       mourning."  
  "I wish we could get hold of this bargeman," said Sedgwick. "Now stop, stop, don't all run
       away in that mad manner; you frighten the people. Charles Herbert and Palmer, you two go down
       to Brocas and inquire."  
  But just at this moment, an increased stir and excitement were evident in the long walk;
       the circle round Sedgwick opened, and there appeared Henry Sydney and Buckhurst.  
  There was a dead silence. It was impossible that suspense could be strained to a higher
       pitch. The air and countenance of Sydney and Buckhurst were rather excited than mournful or
       alarmed. They needed no inquiries, for before they had penetrated the circle they had become
       aware of its cause.  
  Buckhurst, the most energetic of beings, was of course the first to speak. Henry Sydney,
       indeed, looked pale and nervous; but his companion, flushed and resolute, knew exactly how to
       hit a popular assembly and at once came to the point.  
  "It is all a false report; an infernal lie; Coningsby is quite safe, and nobody is
       drowned."  
  There was a cheer that might have been heard at Windsor Castle. Then, turning to Sedgwick,
       in an under tone Buckhurst added:  
  "It   is   all right, but by Jove we have had a shaver! I will tell you all in a
       moment, but we want to keep the thing quiet, and so let the fellows disperse and we will talk
       afterwards."  
  In a few moments, the Long Walk had reassumed its usual character; but Sedgwick, Herbert,
       and one or two others turned into the Playing fields where, undisturbed and unnoticed by the
       multitude, they listened to the promised communication of Buckhurst and Henry Sydney.  
   and Vere had gone about ten minutes, Coningsby, who was very fresh, said he had
       changed his mind and should go and bathe, too. So he left us. He had scarcely got to the pool
       when he heard a cry. There was a fellow drowning. He threw off his clothes and was in in a
       moment. The fact is this, Millbank had plunged in the pool and found himself in some eddies,
       caused by the meeting of two currents. He called out to Vere not to come and tried to swim
       off. But he was beat, and seeing he was in danger, Vere jumped in. But the stream was so
       strong from the great fall of water from the lasher above, that Vere was exhausted before he
       could reach Millbank and nearly sank himself. Well, he just saved himself; but Millbank sank
       as Coningsby jumped in. What do you think of that?"  
  "By Jove!" exclaimed Sedgwick, Herbert and all. The favourite oath of schoolboys
       perpetuates the divinity of Olympus.  
   caught Millbank when he rose; but he found himself in the midst of the same
       strong current that had before nearly swamped Vere. What a lucky thing that he had taken it
       into his head not to pull to-day! Fresher than Vere, he just managed to land Millbank and
       himself. The shouts of Vere called us, and we arrived to find the bodies of Millbank and
       Coningsby apparently lifeless, for Millbank was quite gone, and Coningsby had swooned on
       landing."  
  "If Coningsby had been lost," said Henry Sydney, "I never would have shown my face at Eton
       again."  
  "Can you conceive a position more terrible?" said Buckhurst. "I declare I shall never
       forget it as long as I live. However there was the Lock House at hand; and we got blankets
       and brandy. Coningsby was soon all right; but Millbank, I can tell you, gave us some trouble.
       I thought it was all up. Didn't you, Henry Sydney?"  
  "The most fishy thing I ever saw," said Henry Sydney.  
  "Well, we were fairly frightened here," said Sedgwick. "The first report was, that you had
       gone; but that seemed without foundation. But Coningsby was quite given up. Where are they
       now?"  
  "They are both at their tutors. I thought they had better keep quiet. Vere is with
       Millbank, and we are going back to Coningsby directly; but we thought it best to show,
       finding on our arrival that there were all sorts of rumours about. I think it will be best to
       report at once to our tutor, for he will be sure to hear something."  
  "I would if I were you."  
  
  CHAPTER X.  
   with the being whose idea engrossed his affection.  
   his hearth; all these were powerful and exciting emotions for a young and
       fervent mind, in addition to the peculiar source of sensibility on which we have already
       touched. Lord Vere, who lodged in the same house as Millbank, and was sitting by his bedside,
       observed as night fell that his mind wandered.  
   infringed the regulations, combined with the high character of Millbank, made
       the authorities not over-anxious to visit with penalties a breach of observance, which, in
       the case of the only proved offender, had been attended with such impressive consequences.
       The feat of Coningsby was extolled by all as an act of high gallantry and skill. It confirmed
       and increased the great reputation which he already enjoyed.  
  "Millbank is getting quite well," said Buckhurst to Coningsby a few days after the
       accident. Henry Sydney and I are going to see him. Will you come?"  
  "I think we shall be too many. I will go another day," replied Coningsby.  
  So they went without him. They found Millbank up and reading.  
  "Well, old fellow," said Buckhurst, "how are you? We should have come up before but they
       would not let us. And you are quite right now, eh?"  
  "Quite; has there been any row about it?"  
  "All blown over," said Henry Sydney; "C—y behaved like a trump."  
  "I have seen nobody yet," said Millbank; "they would not let me till to-day. Vere looked in
       this morning and left me this book, but I was asleep. I hope they will let me out in a day or
       two. I want to thank Coningsby; I never shall rest till I have thanked Coningsby."  
  "Oh! he will come to see you," said Henry Sydney. "I asked him just now to come with
       us."  
  "Yes!" said Millbank, eagerly; "and what did he say?"  
  "He thought we should be too many."  
  "I hope I shall see him soon," said Millbank, "some how or other."  
  "I will tell him to come," said Buckhurst.  
  "Oh! no, no; don't tell him to come," said Millbank. "Don't bore him."  
  "I know he is going to play a match at fives this afternoon," said Buckhurst, "for I am
       one."  
  "And who are the others?" inquired Millbank.  
  "Herbert and Campbell."  
  "Herbert is no match for Coningsby," said Millbank.  
  And then they talked over all that had happened since his absence; and Buckhurst gave him a
       very graphic report of the excitement on the afternoon of the accident; at last they were
       obliged to leave him.  
  "Well, good bye, old fellow; we will come and see you every day. What can we do for you?
       Any books or anything?"  
  "If any fellow asks after me," said Millbank, "tell him I shall be glad to see him. It is
       very dull being alone. But do not tell any fellow to come if he does not ask after me."  
   circumstances had prompted him to a more impartial judgment of his rival's
       character. In this mood, the day after the visit of Buckhurst and Henry Sydney, Coningsby
       called on Millbank, but finding his medical attendant with him, Coningsby availed himself of
       that excuse for going away without seeing him.  
  The next day he left Millbank a newspaper on his way to school, time not permitting a
       visit. Two days after, going into his room, he found on his table, a letter addressed to
          Harry Coningsby, Esq.    
  Eton, May—, 1832.  
  "Dear Coningsby,  
   the cause above mentioned, I would not show it. I do not expect that we shall
       be more together than before; nor can I ever suppose that you could like me as you like Henry
       Sydney and Buckhurst, or even as you like Vere; but still I hope you will always think of me
       with kindness now, and let me sign myself, if ever I do write to you,  
  Your most attached, affectionate, and devoted friend,  
    Oswald Millbank   ."  
  
  CHAPTER XI.  
   coin of the realm, to the purse collecting for the Captain of Eton, the senior
       scholar on the Foundation, who is about to repair to King's College Cambridge.  
   costume, and are called "Saltbearers." It is their business, together with the
       twelve senior Collegers of the fifth form, who are called "Runners," and whose costume is
       also determined by the taste of the wearers, to levy the contributions. And all the Oppidans
       of the fifth form, among whom ranked Coningsby, class as "Corporals;" and are severally
       followed by one or more lower boys, who are denominated "Polemen," but who appear in their
       ordinary dress.  
   criticising the arriving guests; others encircling some magnificent hero, who
       astounded them with his slashed doublet or flowing plume.  
  A knot of boys, sitting on the Long Walk wall with their feet swinging in the air, watched
       the arriving guests of the Provost.  
  "I say, Townshend," said one, "there's Grobbleton; he   was   heard you. I wonder if the Duke will come. Won't we give him a cheer!"  
  "By Jove, who is this?" exclaimed Townshend, and he jumped from the wall, and followed by
       his companions rushed towards the road.  
   hesitated. The Albanian Chief then advanced to the door of the carriage, which
       he opened, and in a tone of great courtesy, announced that he was under the necessity of
       troubling its inmates for 'salt.' There was no delay. The Lord of the equipage with the
       amiable condescension of a "grand monarque," expressed his hope that the collection would be
       an ample one, and as an old Etonian, placed in the hands of the Albanian his contribution, a
       magnificent purse furnished for the occasion and heavy with gold.  
  "Don't be alarmed, ladies," said a very handsome young officer laughing, and taking off his
       cocked hat.  
  "Ah!" exclaimed one of the ladies, turning at the voice, and starting a little. "Ah! it is
       Mr. Coningsby."  
  Lord Eskdale paid the salt for the next carriage. "Do they come down pretty stiff?" he
       inquired, and then pulling forth a roll of bank-notes from the pocket of his pea-jacket, he
       wished them good morning.  
   make life delightful, watched with some intentness the scene in the quadrangle
       beneath.  
  "I would give his fame," said Lord Monmouth; "if I had it, and my wealth—to be
       sixteen."  
  Five hundred of the youth of England, sparkling with health, high spirits, and fancy
       dresses, were now assembled in the quadrangle. They formed into rank, and headed by a band of
       the Guards, thrice they marched round the court. Then quitting the College, they commenced
       their progress 'ad Montem.' It was a brilliant spectacle to see them defiling through the
       playing fields; those bowery meads; the river sparkling in the sun; the castled heights of
       Windsor, their glorious landscape; behind them, the pinnacles of their College.  
   they were marching from Athens or Thebes or Sparta to some heroic deed,
       encircled the mount; the ensign reaches its summit, and then amid a deafening cry of "Floreat
       Etona," he unfurls, and thrice waves the consecrated standard!  
  "Lord Monmouth," said Mr. Rigby to Coningsby, "wishes that you should beg your friends to
       dine with him. Of course you will ask Lord Henry and your friend Sir Charles Buckhurst; and
       is there any one else that you would like to invite?"  
  "Why there is Vere," said Coningsby hesitating, "and—"  
  "Vere! What Lord Vere?" said Mr. Rigby. "Hum! He is one of your friends is he? His father
       has done a great deal of mischief, but still he is Lord Vere. Well, of course, you can invite
       Vere."  
  "There is another fellow I should like to ask very much," said Coningsby, "if Lord Monmouth
       would not think I was asking too many."  
  "Never fear that; he sent me particularly to tell you to invite as many as you liked."  
  "Well then, I should like to ask Millbank."  
  "Millbank!" said Mr. Rigby a little excited, and then he added: "Is that a son of Lady
       Albinia Millbank."  
  "No; his mother is not a Lady Albinia, but he is a great friend of mine. His father is a
       Lancashire manufacturer."  
  "By no means," exclaimed Mr. Rigby quite agitated. "There is nothing in the world that Lord
       Monmouth dislikes so much as Manchester manufacturers, and particularly if they bear the name
       of Millbank. It must not be thought of, my dear Harry. I hope you have not spoken to the
       young man on the subject. I assure you it is quite out of the question. It would make Lord
       Monmouth quite ill. It would spoil everything; quite upset him."  
   her to some of the scenes and details of Eton life, his vexation was soon
       absorbed in the pride of acting in the face of his companions as the cavalier of a beautiful
       lady, and becoming the cicerone of the most brilliant party that had attended Montem. He
       presented his friends, too, to Lord Monmouth, who gave them a most cordial invitation to dine
       with him at his hotel at Windsor, which they most warmly accepted. Buckhurst delighted the
       Marquess by his reckless genius. Even Lucretia deigned to appear amused; especially when on
       visiting the upper school, the name of   Cardiff   , the title Lord Monmouth bore in his
       youthful days, was pointed out to her by Coningsby, cut with his grandfather's own knife on
       the classic panels of that memorable wall in which scarcely a name that has flourished in our
       history, since the commencement of the eighteenth century, may not be observed with curious
       admiration.  
   discipline, which Buckhurst would not stand. He rallied Mr. Rigby roundly, and
       Coningsby, full of Champagne, and owing Rigby several years of contradiction, followed up the
       assault. Lord Monmouth, who liked a butt, and had a weakness for boisterous gaiety, slily
       encouraged the boys, till Rigby began to lose his temper and get noisy.  
  The lads had the best of it; they said a great many funny things, and delivered themselves
       of several sharp retorts; whereas there was something ridiculous in Rigby putting forth his
       "slashing" talents against such younkers. However, he brought the infliction on himself by
       his strange habit of deciding on subjects of which he knew nothing, and of always
       contradicting persons on the very subjects of which they were necessarily masters.  
   sang an extemporaneous song on the ceremony of the day, and introduced the
       names of all the guests at the dinner, and of a great many other persons besides. This was
       capital! The boys were in raptures, but when the singer threw forth a verse about Doctor
       Keate, the applause became uproarious.  
  "Good bye, my dear Harry," said Lord Monmouth, when he bade his grandson farewell. "I am
       going abroad again; I cannot remain in this radical-ridden country. Remember, though I am
       away, Monmouth House is your home,—at least as long as it belongs to me. I understand my
       tailor has turned Liberal, and is going to stand for one of the metropolitan districts; a
       friend of Lord Durham; perhaps I shall find him in it when I return. I fear there are evil
       days for the NEW   Generation   !"  
  END OF BOOK I.  
 / 
  
  
  BOOK II.  
  CHAPTER I.  
  It was early in November, 1834, and a large shooting party was assembled at
       Beaumanoir, the seat of that great nobleman, who was the father of Henry Sydney. England is
       unrivalled for two things—sporting and politics. They were combined at Beaumanoir; for the
       guests came not merely to slaughter the Duke's pheasants, but to hold council on the
       prospects of the party, which, it was supposed by the initiated, began at this time to
       indicate some symptoms of brightening.  
  The success of the Reform Ministry on their first appeal to the new constituency which they
       had created, had been fatally complete. But the triumph was as destructive to the victors as
       to the vanquished.  
   Lord Grey was more the fashion at the commencement of 1834, and before the
       close of that eventful year, the once popular Reform Ministry was upset, and the eagerly
       sought Reformed Parliament dissolved!  
   to themselves the government of this country, for, at least, the lives of the
       present generation. And even the well informed in such matters were inclined to look upon the
       perplexing circumstances to which we have alluded, rather as symptoms of a want of discipline
       in a new system of tactics, than as evidences of any essential and deeply-rooted
       disorder.  
   Grey himself, attended by circumstances which even a friendly historian could
       scarcely describe as honourable to his party or dignified to himself; latterly, the
       extemporaneous address of King William to the bishops; the vagrant and grotesque Apocalypse
       of the Lord Chancellor; and the fierce recrimination and memorable defiance of the Edinburgh
       banquet; all these impressive instances of public affairs and public conduct had combined to
       create a predominant opinion that, whatever might be the consequences, the prolonged
       continuance of the present party in power was a clear impossibility.  
   the one that met in cabal. The consequence of destroying the legitimate
       opposition of the country was, that a moiety of the supporters of government had to discharge
       the duties of Opposition.  
  Herein then we detect the real cause of all that irregular and unsettled carriage of public
       men, which so perplexed the nation after the passing of the Reform Act. No government can be
       long secure without a formidable Opposition. It reduces their supporters to that tractable
       number which can be managed by the joint influences of fruition and of hope. It offers
       vengeance to the discontented and distinction to the ambitious; and employs the energies of
       aspiring spirits, who otherwise may prove traitors in a division, or assassins in a
       debate.  
   and the country, that they were at length relieved from its odious repression!
       In the hurry of existence one is apt too generally to pass over the political history of the
       times in which we ourselves live. The two years that followed the Reform of the House of
       Commons are full of instruction on which a young man would do well to ponder. It is hardly
       possible that he could rise from the study of these annals without a confirmed disgust for
       political intrigue; a dazzling practice, apt at first to fascinate youth, for it appeals at
       once to our invention and our courage, but which really should only be the resource of the
       second-rate. Great minds must trust to great truths and great talents for their rise, and
       nothing else.  
   Toryism unhappily too long prevalent in this country, was held to be literally
       defunct, except by a few old battered crones of office crouched round the embers of faction
       which they were fanning, and muttering "re-action" in mystic whispers. It cannot be supposed,
       indeed, for a moment, that the distinguished personage who had led that party in the House of
       Commons previously to the passing of the act of 1832, ever despaired in consequence of his
       own career. His then time of life, the perfection, almost the prime, of manhood; his
       parliamentary practice, doubly estimable in an inexperienced assembly; his political
       knowledge; his fair character and reputable position; his talents and tone as a public
       speaker, which he had always aimed to adapt to the habits and culture of that middle class
       from which it was concluded the benches of the new Parliament were mainly to be recruited
       —all these were qualities, the possession of which must have assured a mind, not apt to be
       disturbed in its calculations by any intemperate heats, that with time and patience the game
       was yet for him.  
  Unquestionably, whatever may have been insinuated, this distinguished person had no inkling
       that his services in 1834 might be claimed by his Sovereign. At the close of the session of
       that year he had quitted England with his family and had arrived at Rome, where it was his
       intention to pass the winter. The party charges that have imputed to him a previous and
       sinister knowledge of the intentions of the Court, appear to have been made not only in
       ignorance of the personal character, but of the real position, of the future minister.  
   Impudently usurping the name of that party of which nationality, and therefore
       universality, is the essence, these pseudo-Tories made Exclusion the principle of their
       political constitution, and Restriction the genius of their commercial code.  
  The blind goddess that plays with human fortunes has mixed up the memory of these men with
       traditions of national glory. They conducted to a prosperous conclusion the most renowned war
       in which England has ever been engaged. Yet every military conception that emanated from
       their cabinet was branded by their characteristic want of grandeur. Chance, however, sent
       them a great military genius, whom they treated for a long time with indifference; and whom
       they never heartily supported until his career had made him their master. His transcendent
       exploits and European events, even greater than his achievements, placed in the manikin grasp
       of the English ministry—the settlement of Europe.  
   and political sagacity. Their capital feats were the creation of two kingdoms,
       both of which are already erased from the map of Europe. They made no single preparation for
       the inevitable, almost impending, conjunctures of the East. All that remains of the pragmatic
       arrangements of the mighty Congress of Vienna is the mediatisation of the petty German
       Princes.  
   indeed, were the mere children of routine. They prided themselves on being
       practical men. In the language of this defunct school of statesmen, a practical man is a man
       who practises the blunders of his predecessors.  
   hurry-skurry of money-making, men-making and machine-making, we had altogether
       outgrown, not the spirit, but the organization, of our institutions.  
  The peace came; the stimulating influences suddenly ceased; the people, in a novel and
       painful position, found themselves without guides. They went to the ministry; they asked to
       be guided; they asked to be governed. Commerce requested a code; trade required a currency;
       the unfranchised subject solicited his equal privilege; suffering labour clamoured for its
       rights; a new race demanded education. What did the ministry do?  
  They fell into a panic. Having fulfilled during their lives the duties of administration,
       they were frightened because they were called upon, for the first time, to perform the
       functions of government. Like all weak men, they had recourse to what they called strong
       measures. They determined to put down the multitude. They thought they were imitating Mr.
       Pitt, because they mistook disorganization for sedition.  
  Their projects of relief were as ridiculous as their system of coercion was ruthless; both
       were alike founded in intense ignorance. When we recall Mr. Vansittart with his currency
       resolutions; Lord Castlereagh with his plans for the employment of labour; and Lord Sidmouth
       with his plots for ensnaring the laborious; one is tempted to imagine that the present epoch
       has been one of peculiar advances in political ability, and marvel how England could have
       attained her present pitch under a series of such governors.  
   England immediately before the French Revolution, one need only refer to the
       speeches of Mr. Pitt, and especially to those of that profound statesman and most instructed
       man, Lord Shelburne, to find that we can boast no remarkable superiority either in political
       justice or in political economy. One must attribute this degeneracy, therefore, to the long
       war and our insular position, acting upon men naturally of inferior abilities, and
       unfortunately, in addition, of illiterate habits.  
   who was not a supporter of the existing administration. If any one impeached
       the management of a department, the public was assured that the accuser had embezzled; if any
       one complained of the conduct of a colonial governor, the complainant was announced as a
       returned convict. An amelioration of the criminal code was discountenanced because a search
       in the parish register of an obscure village proved that the proposer had not been born in
       wedlock. A relaxation of the commercial system was denounced because one of its principal
       advocates was a Socinian. The inutility of Parliamentary Reform was ever obvious since Mr.
       Rigby was a Member of the House of Commons.  
   and that too by men of mean attainments and moderate abilities. But the war had
       directed the energies of the English people into channels by no means favourable to political
       education. Conquerors of the world, with their ports filled with the shipping of every clime,
       and their manufactories supplying the European continent, in the art of self-government, that
       art in which their fathers excelled, they had become literally children; and Rigby and his
       brother hirelings were the nurses that frightened them with hideous fables and ugly
       words.  
   though not a statesman, might be classed among those whom the Lord Keeper
       Williams used to call "statemongers." In a subordinate position his meagre diligence and his
       frigid method might not have been without value; but the qualities that he possessed were
       misplaced; nor can any character be conceived less invested with the happy properties of a
       leader. In the conduct of public affairs, his disposition was exactly the reverse to that
       which is the characteristic of great men. He was peremptory in little questions, and great
       ones he left open.  
   families had arisen on the Tory side that almost rivalled old Newcastle himself
       in their electioneering management; and it was evident that unless some re-construction of
       the House of Commons could be effected, the Whig party could never obtain a permanent hold of
       official power. Hence, from that period, the Whigs became Parliamentary Reformers.  
  It was inevitable, therefore, that the country should be governed by the same party;
       indispensable that the ministry should be renovated by new brains and blood. Accordingly, a
       Mediocrity, not without repugnance, was induced to withdraw, and the great name of Wellington
       supplied his place in council. The talents of the Duke, as they were then understood, were
       not exactly of the kind most required by the cabinet, and his colleagues were most careful
       that he should not occupy too prominent a post; but still it was an impressive acquisition,
       and imparted to the ministry a semblance of renown.  
   Having acquired a certain experience of the duties of administration and
       distinction for his mode of fulfilling them, he had withdrawn from his public charge; perhaps
       because he found it a barrier to the attainment of that parliamentary reputation for which he
       had already shown both a desire and a capacity; perhaps, because being young and independent,
       he was not over anxious irremediably to identify his career with a school of politics of the
       infallibility of which his experience might have already made him a little sceptical. But he
       possessed the talents that were absolutely wanted, and the terms were at his own dictation.
       Another and a very distinguished Mediocrity who would not resign, was thrust out; and Mr.
       Peel became Secretary of State.  
   assisted by a then mutual conviction, that the difference of age, the
       circumstance of sitting in different houses, and the general contrast of their previous
       pursuits and accomplishments, rendered personal rivalry out of the question. From this
       moment, too, the domestic government of the country assumed a new character, and one
       universally admitted to have been distinguished by a spirit of enlightened progress and
       comprehensive amelioration.  
   and surrounded by colleagues notoriously incapable to assist him in debate.  
  The accession of Mr. Canning to the cabinet, in a position too of surpassing influence,
       soon led to a further weeding of the Mediocrities, and among other introductions to the
       memorable entrance of Mr. Huskisson. In this wise did that cabinet, once notable only for the
       absence of all those qualities which authorize the possession of power, come to be generally
       esteemed as a body of men, who for parliamentary eloquence, official practice, political
       information, sagacity in council, and a due understanding of their epoch, were inferior to
       none that had directed the policy of the empire since the Revolution.  
   England should never be degraded into the position of a Venetian Doge.  
   religion, sectarian religion led to political exclusion, and political
       exclusion was soon accompanied by commercial restraint.  
  It would be fanciful to assume that the Liverpool Cabinet, in their ameliorating career,
       was directed by any desire to recur to the primordial tenets of the Tory party. That was not
       an epoch when statesmen cared to prosecute the investigation of principles. It was a period
       of happy and enlightened practice. A profounder policy is the offspring of a time like the
       present, when the original postulates of institutions are called in question. The Liverpool
       Cabinet unconsciously approximated to these opinions, because from careful experiment they
       were convinced of their beneficial tendency, and they thus bore an unintentional and
       impartial testimony to their truth. Like many men, who think they are inventors, they were
       only reproducing ancient wisdom.  
   may be sometimes imperative. But these statesmen took expediency for their
       director, when principle would have given them all that expediency insured, and much
       more.  
  This ministry, strong in the confidence of the sovereign, the parliament, and the people,
       might, by the courageous promulgation of great historical truths, have gradually formed a
       public opinion, that would have permitted them to organize the Tory party on a broad, a
       permanent and national basis. They might have nobly effected a complete settlement of
       Ireland, which a shattered section of this very cabinet was forced a few years after to do
       partially, and in an equivocating and equivocal manner. They might have concluded a
       satisfactory re-construction of the third estate, without producing that convulsion with
       which from its violent fabrication our social system still vibrates. Lastly, they might have
       adjusted the rights and properties of our national industries in a manner which would have
       prevented that fierce and fatal rivalry that is now disturbing every hearth of the United
       Kingdom.  
  We may therefore visit on the laches of this ministry the introduction of that new
       principle and power into our constitution which ultimately may absorb all—   Agitation  
       . This Cabinet then, with so much brilliancy on its surface, is the real parent of the Roman
       Catholic Association, the Political Unions, the Anti-Corn Law League.  
   wounding no vanity and offending no pride, secured in their councils equality
       among the able, was the tocsin of their anarchy. There existed in this Cabinet two men, who
       were resolved immediately to be prime ministers; a third who was resolved eventually to be
       prime minister, but would, at any rate occupy no ministerial post, without the lead of a
       House of Parliament; and a fourth, who felt himself capable of being prime minister, but
       despaired of the revolution which could alone make him one; and who found an untimely end
       when that revolution had arrived.  
   the King would send for him, and he was also aware that Mr. Peel would no
       longer serve under any minister in the House of Commons. Under any circumstances it would
       have been impossible to keep the Liverpool Cabinet together. The struggle therefore between
       the Duke of Wellington and "my dear Mr. Canning," was internecine, and ended somewhat
       unexpectedly.  
   articles in a notorious evening newspaper in which it was, as Tadpole and Taper
       declared, most "slashingly" shown, that the son of an actress could never be tolerated as the
       Prime Minister of England. Not content with this, and never doubting for a moment the
       authentic basis of his persuasion, Mr. Rigby poured forth his coarse volubility on the
       subject at several of the new clubs which he was getting up in order to revenge himself for
       having been black-balled at Whites'.  
   that his Majesty was agitated, and learned from an humble, but secure
       authority, that in spite of all his slashing articles and Lucian Gay's parodies of the Irish
       melodies, Canning was to be Prime Minister.  
   the door, and with agitated countenance, and eyes suffused with tears, threw
       himself into the arms of the astonished Mr. Canning.  
  "All is right," exclaimed the devoted Rigby, in broken tones; "I have convinced the King
       that the First Minister must be in the House of Commons. No one knows it but myself; but it
       is certain."  
   detected elements in our social system which required a finer observation, and
       a more unbroken study, than the gyves and trammels of office would permit. He may have
       discovered that the representation of the University, looked upon in those days as the blue
       ribbon of the House of Commons, was a sufficient fetter without unnecessarily adding to its
       restraint. He may have wished to reserve himself for a happier occasion, and a more
       progressive period. He may have felt the strong necessity of arresting himself in his rapid
       career of felicitous routine, to survey his position in calmness, and to comprehend the
       stirring age that was approaching.  
   diverted the public mind into a stronger and more turbulent current, was again
       impending, while the intervening history of the country had been prolific in events which had
       aggravated the necessity of investigating the sources of the wealth of nations. The time had
       arrived when parliamentary pre-eminence could no longer be achieved or maintained by gorgeous
       abstractions borrowed from Burke, shallow systems purloined from De Lolme, adorned with
       Horatian points, or varied with Virgilian passages. It was to be an age of abstruse
       disquisition, that required a compact and sinewy intellect, nurtured in a class of learning
       not yet honoured in Colleges, and which might arrive at conclusions conflicting with
       predominant prejudices.  
   by the disingenuous rivalry usually imputed to him. His statement in Parliament
       of the determining circumstances of his conduct, coupled with his subsequent and almost
       immediate policy, may perhaps always leave this a painful and ambiguous passage in his
       career; but in passing judgment on public men, it behoves us ever to take large and extended
       views of their conduct; and previous incidents will often satisfactorily explain subsequent
       events, which, without their illustrating aid, are involved in misapprehension, or
       mystery.  
   of 1830, that he would never again accept a secondary position in office. But
       the Duke of Wellington was too old a tactician to lose so valuable an ally. So his Grace
       declared after the Reform Bill was passed, as its inevitable result, that thenceforth the
       Prime Minister must be a member of the House of Commons, and this aphorism, cited as usual by
       the Duke's parasites as demonstration of his supreme sagacity, was a graceful mode of
       resigning the preeminence which had been productive of such great party disasters. It is
       remarkable that the party who devised and passed the Reform Bill, and who governed the nation
       in consequence for ten years, never once had their Prime Minister in the House of Commons;
       but that does not signify; the Duke's maxim is still quoted as an oracle almost equal in
       prescience to his famous query, How the King's Government was to be carried on? a question to
       which his Grace by this time has contrived to give a tolerably practical answer.  
   even from the Duke of Wellington in 1832; was at length caught in 1834; the
       victim of ceaseless intriguers, who neither comprehended his position, nor that of their
       country.  
  
  CHAPTER II.  
   column commemorated the great statesman who had advanced the family a step in
       the peerage. Beyond the limits of this pleasance the hart and hind wandered in a wilderness
       abounding in ferny coverts and green and stately trees.  
   simplicity that was full of charm, his manner was finished. He never offended
       any one's self-love. His good breeding, indeed, sprang from the only sure source of gentle
       manners—a kind heart. To have pained others would have pained himself. Perhaps too this noble
       sympathy may have been in some degree prompted by the ancient blood in his veins, an accident
       of lineage rather rare with the English nobility. One could hardly praise him for the strong
       affections that bound him to his hearth, for fortune had given him the most pleasing family
       in the world; but, above all, a peerless wife.  
   its mistress, and one might form some faint idea of this gracious
       personage.  
  The eldest son of this house was now on the continent; of his two younger brothers, one was
       with his regiment, and the other was Coningsby's friend at Eton, our Henry Sydney. The two
       eldest daughters had just married, on the same day, and at the same altar; and the remaining
       one, Theresa, was still a child.  
  The Duke had occupied a chief post in the household under the late administration, and his
       present guests chiefly consisted of his former colleagues in office. There were several
       members of the late cabinet, several members of his Grace's late boroughs, looking very much
       like martyrs, full of suffering and of hope. Mr. Tadpole and Mr. Taper were also there; they
       too had lost their seats since 1832; but being men of business, and accustomed from early
       life to look about them, they had already commenced the combinations which on a future
       occasion were to bear them back to the assembly where they were so missed.  
   which had escaped the fatal schedules, and where he had what they called a
       "connexion;" that is to say, a section of the suffrages who had a lively remembrance of
       Treasury favours once bestowed by Mr. Taper, and who had not been as liberally dealt with by
       the existing powers. This connexion of Taper was in time to leaven the whole mass of the
       constituent body, and make it rise in full rebellion against its present liberal
       representative, who, being one of a majority of three hundred, could get nothing when he
       called at Whitehall, or Downing Street.  
  Tadpole, on the contrary, who was of a larger grasp of mind than Taper, with more of
       imagination and device, but not so safe a man, was coquetting with a manufacturing town and a
       large constituency, where he was to succeed by the aid of the Wesleyans, of which pious body
       Tadpole had suddenly become a most fervent admirer. The great Mr. Rigby too was a guest, out
       of Parliament, nor caring to be in; but hearing that his friends had some hopes, he thought
       he would just come down to dash them.  
  The political grapes were sour for Mr. Rigby; a prophet of evil, he preached only
       mortification and repentance and despair to his late colleagues. It was the only satisfaction
       left Mr. Rigby, except assuring the Duke that the finest pictures in his gallery were copies,
       and recommending him to pull down Beaumanoir, and rebuild it on a design with which Mr. Rigby
       would furnish him.  
  The battue and the banquet were over; the ladies had withdrawn; and the butler placed a
       fresh bottle of claret on the table.  
  "And you really think you could give us a majority, Tadpole?" said the Duke.  
  Mr. Tadpole with some ceremony took a memorandum-book out of his pocket, amid the smiles
       and faint well-bred merriment of his friends.  
  "Tadpole is nothing without his book," whispered Lord Fitz-booby.  
  "It is here," said Mr. Tadpole, emphatically patting his volume, "a clear working majority
       of twenty-two."  
  "Near sailing, that!" cried the Duke.  
  "A far better majority than the present government have," said Mr. Tadpole.  
  "There is nothing like a good small majority," said Mr. Taper, "and a good
       registration."  
  "Ay! register, register, register!" said the Duke. "Those were immortal words."  
  "I can tell your Grace three far better ones," said Mr. Tadpole with a self-complacent air.
       "Object, object, object!"  
  "You may register, and you may object," said Mr. Rigby, "but you will never get rid of
       Schedule A and Schedule B."  
  "But who could have supposed two years ago that affairs would be in their present
       position," said Mr. Taper deferentially.  
  "I foretold it," said Mr. Rigby. "Every one knows that no government now can last
       twelvemonths."  
  "We may make fresh boroughs," said Taper. "We have reduced Shabbyton at the last
       registration under three hundred."  
  "And the Wesleyans!" said Tadpole. "We never counted on the Wesleyans!"  
  "I am told those Wesleyans are really a very respectable body," said Lord Fitz-booby. "I
       believe there is no very material difference between their tenets and those of the
       Establishment. I never heard of them much till lately. We have too long confounded them with
       the mass of the Dissenters, but their conduct at several of the latter elections proves that
       they are far from being unreasonable and disloyal individuals. When we come in, something
       should be done for the Wesleyans, eh, Rigby?"  
  "All that your Lordship can do for the Wesleyans is what they will very shortly do for
       themselves—appropriate a portion of the Church Revenues to their own use."  
  "Nay, nay," said Mr. Tadpole with a chuckle, "I don't think we shall find the Church
       attacked again in a hurry. I only wish they would try! A good Church cry before a
       registration," he continued rubbing his hands; "eh, my Lord, I think that would do."  
  "But how are we to turn them out?" said the Duke.  
  "Ah!" said Mr. Taper, "that is a great question."  
  "What do you think of a repeal of the malt tax?" said Lord Fitz-Booby. "They have been
       trying it on in—shire, and I am told it goes down very well."  
  "No repeal of any tax," said Taper, sincerely shocked and shaking his head; "and the
       malt-tax of all others. I am all against that."  
  "It is a very good cry though, if there be no other," said Tadpole.  
  "I am all for a religious cry," said Taper. "It means nothing, and if successful, does not
       interfere with business when we are in."  
   acquaintance with the Red Book and Beatson's Political Index, which he could
       repeat backwards, were silenced. The Duke, who was well instructed and liked to be talked to,
       sipped his claret and was rather amused by Rigby's lecture, particularly by one or two
       statements characterized by Rigby's happy audacity, but which the Duke was too indolent to
       question. Lord Fitz-Booby listened with his mouth open, but rather bored. At length when
       there was a momentary pause he said:  
  "In my time, the regular thing was to move an amendment on the address."  
  "Quite out of the question," exclaimed Tadpole with a scoff.  
  "Entirely given up," said Taper with a sneer.  
  "If you will drink no more claret, we will go and hear some music," said the Duke.  
  
  CHAPTER III.  
  A breakfast at Beaumanoir was a meal of some ceremony. Every guest was expected to
       attend, and at a somewhat early hour. Their host and hostess set them the example of
       punctuality. 'Tis an old form rigidly adhered to in some great houses, but it must be
       confessed does not contrast very agreeably with the easier arrangements of establishments of
       less pretension and of more modern order.  
   without notice; and several inquired with some anxiety, whether their host were
       indisposed.  
  "The Duke has received some letters from London which detain him," replied the Duchess. "He
       will join us."  
  "Your Grace will be glad to hear that your son Henry is very well," said Mr. Rigby; "I
       heard of him this morning. Harry Coningsby enclosed me a letter for his grandfather, and
       tells me that he and Henry Sydney had just had a capital run with the King's hounds."  
  "It is three years since we have seen Mr. Coningsby," said the Duchess. "Once he was often
       here. He was a great favorite of mine. I hardly ever knew a more interesting boy."  
  "Yes, I have done a great deal for him," said Mr. Rigby. "Lord Monmouth is fond of him and
       wishes that he should make a figure; but how any one is to distinguish himself now, I really
       am at a loss to comprehend."  
  "But are affairs so very bad?" said the Duchess, smiling. "I thought that we were all
       regaining our good sense and good temper."  
   temper in England are concentrated in your Grace," said Mr. Rigby very
       gallantly.  
  "I should be sorry to be such a monopolist. But Lord Fitz-Booby was giving me last night
       quite a glowing report of Mr. Tadpole's prospects for the nation. We were all to have our own
       again; and Percy to carry the county."  
  "My dear Madam, before twelve months are past there will not be a county in England. Why
       should there be? If boroughs are to be disfranchised, why should not counties be
       destroyed?"  
  At this moment the Duke entered, apparently agitated. He bowed to his guests and apologized
       for his unusual absence. "The truth is," he continued, "I have just received a very important
       despatch. An event has occurred which may materially affect affairs. Lord Spencer is
       dead."  
  A thunderbolt in a summer sky, as Sir William Temple says, could not have produced a
       greater sensation. The business of the repast ceased in a moment. The knives and forks were
       suddenly silent. All was still.  
  "It is an immense event," said Tadpole.  
  "I don't see my way," said Taper.  
  "When did he die?" said Lord Fitz-Booby.  
  "I don't believe it," said Mr. Rigby.  
  "They have got their man ready," said Tadpole.  
  "It is impossible to say what will happen," said Taper.  
  "Now is the time for an amendment on the address," said Fitz-Booby.  
  "There are two reasons which convince me that Lord Spencer is not dead," said Mr.
       Rigby.  
  "I fear there is no doubt of it," said the Duke, shaking his head.  
  "Lord Althorp was the only man who could keep them together," said Lord Fitz-Booby.  
  "On the contrary," said Tadpole. "If I be right in my man, and I have no doubt of it, you
       will have a radical programme and they will be stronger than ever."  
  "Do you think they can get the steam up again?" said Taper, musingly.  
  "They will bid high," replied Tadpole. "Nothing could be more unfortunate than this death.
       Things were going on so well and so quietly! The Wesleyans almost with us!"  
  "And Shabbyton, too!" mournfully exclaimed Taper. "Another registration and quiet times,
       and I could have reduced the constituency to two hundred and fifty."  
  "If Lord Spencer had died on the 10th," said Rigby, "it must have been known to Henry
       Rivers. And I have a letter from Henry Rivers by this post. Now, Althorp is in
       Northamptonshire, mark that, and Northamptonshire is a county—"  
  "My dear Rigby," said the Duke, "pardon me for interrupting you. Unhappily, there is no
       doubt Lord Spencer is dead, for I am one of his executors."  
  This announcement silenced even Mr. Rigby, and the conversation now entirely merged in
       speculations on what would occur. Numerous were the conjectures hazarded, but the prevailing
       impression was, that this unforeseen event might embarrass those secret expectations of Court
       succour in which a certain section of the party had for some time reason to indulge.  
   change might be visibly observed in the tone of the party at Beaumanoir. They
       became silent, moody, and restless. There seemed a general, though not avowed, conviction
       that a crisis of some kind or other was at hand. The post too brought letters every day from
       town teeming with fanciful speculations, and occasionally mysterious hopes.  
  "I kept this cover for Peel," said the Duke pensively, as he loaded his gun on the morning
       of the 14th. "Do you know, I was always against his going to Rome?"  
  "It is very odd," said Tadpole, "but I was thinking of the very same thing."  
  "It will be fifteen years before England will see a Tory Government," said Mr. Rigby,
       drawing his ramrod, "and then it will only last five months."  
  "Melbourne, Althorp, and Durham—all in the Lords," said Taper. "Three leaders! They must
       quarrel."  
  "If Durham come in, mark me, he will dissolve on Household Suffrage and the Ballot," said
       Tadpole.  
  "Not near as good a cry as Church," replied Taper.  
  "With the Malt Tax," said Tadpole. "Church will not do against Household Suffrage and
       Ballot without the Malt Tax."  
  "Malt Tax is madness," said Taper. "A good farmer's friend cry without Malt Tax, would work
       just as well."  
  "They will never dissolve," said the Duke. "They are so strong."  
  "They cannot go on with three hundred majority," said Taper. "Forty is as much as can be
       managed with open constituencies."  
  "If he had only gone to Paris instead of Rome!" said the Duke.  
  "Yes," said Mr. Rigby, "I could have written to him then by every post, and undeceived him
       as to his position."  
  "After all, he is the only man," said the Duke; "and I really believe the country thinks
       so."  
  "Pray, what is the country?" inquired Mr. Rigby. "The country is nothing; it is the
       constituency you have to deal with."  
  "And to manage them you must have a good cry," said Taper. "All now depends upon a good
       cry."  
  "So much for the science of politics," said the Duke, bringing down a pheasant. "How Peel
       would have enjoyed this cover!"  
  "He will have plenty of time for sport during his life," said Mr. Rigby.  
   deputations from Wesleyans, and well-registered boroughs anxious to receive
       well-principled candidates. Taper was off to get the first job at the contingent Treasury, in
       favour of the Borough of Shabbyton. Mr. Rigby alone was silent; but he quietly ordered a
       post-chaise at daybreak, and long before his fellow guests were roused from their slumbers,
       he was halfway to London, ready to give advice either at the Pavilion or Apsley House.  
  
  CHAPTER IV.  
   and animated by that active fortitude which is the soul of free
       governments.  
  It was a lively season, that winter of 1834! What hopes, what fears, and what bets! From
       the day on which Mr. Hudson was to arrive at Rome to the election of the Speaker, not a
       contingency that was not the subject of a wager! The people sprang up like mushrooms; town
       suddenly became full. Everybody who had been in office, and everybody who wished to be in
       office; everybody who had ever had anything, and everybody who ever expected to have
       anything; were alike visible. All of course by mere accident; one might meet the same men
       regularly every day for a month, who were only passing through town.  
   in his curt husky manner was, that he had to carry on the King's government. As
       for his solitary colleague, he listened and smiled, and then in his musical voice asked them
       questions in return, which is the best possible mode of avoiding awkward inquiries. It was
       very unfair this; for no one knew what tone to take; whether they should go down to their
       public dinners and denounce the Reform Act, or praise it; whether the Church was to be
       re-modelled or only admonished; whether Ireland was to be conquered or conciliated.  
  "This can't go on much longer," said Taper to Tadpole, as they reviewed together their
       electioneering correspondence on the Ist of December; "We have no cry."  
  "He is half way by this time," said Tadpole; "send an extract from a private letter to the
       Standard, dated Augsburg, and say he will be here in four days."  
  At last he came; the great man in a great position, summoned from Rome to govern England.
       The very day that he arrived, he had his audience with the King.  
  It was two days after this audience; the town, though November, in a state of great
       excitement; clubs crowded, not only morning-rooms, but halls and staircases swarming with
       members eager to give and to receive rumours equally vain; streets lined with cabs and
       chariots, grooms and horses; it was two days after this audience that Mr. Ormsby, celebrated
       for his political dinners, gave one to a very numerous party. Indeed his saloons to-day,
       during the half-hour of gathering which precedes dinner, offered in the various groups, the
       anxious countenances, the inquiring voices, and the mysterious whispers, rather the character
       of an Exchange or Bourse than the tone of a festive society.  
   might there too be detected under all the agonies of the crisis; just beginning
       to feel the dread misgiving, whether being a slave and a sneak were sufficient qualifications
       for office, without family or connexion. Poor fellow! half the industry he had wasted on his
       cheerless craft might have made his fortune in some decent trade!  
  In dazzling contrast with these throes of low ambition, were some brilliant personages who
       had just scampered up from Melton, thinking it probable that Sir Robert might want some moral
       lords of the bed-chamber. Whatever may have been their private fears or feelings, all however
       seemed smiling and significant; as if they knew something if they chose to tell it, and that
       something very much to their own satisfaction. The only grave countenance that was
       occasionally ushered into the room belonged to some individual whose destiny was not in
       doubt, and who was already practising the official air that was in future to repress the
       familiarity of his former fellow-strugglers.  
   noble, who wanted something in the general scramble, but what he knew not; only
       he had a vague feeling he ought to have something, having made such great sacrifices.  
  "There is a report that Clifford is to be secretary to the Board of Control," said Mr.
       Earwig, whose whole soul was in this subaltern arrangement, of which the Minister of course
       had not even thought; "but I cannot trace it to any authority."  
  "I wonder who will be their Master of the Horse," said the great noble, loving gossip
       though he despised the gossipper.  
  "Clifford has done nothing for the party," said Mr. Earwig.  
  "I dare say Rambrooke will have the Buckhounds," said the great noble musingly.  
  "Your Lordship has not heard Clifford's name mentioned?" continued Mr. Earwig.  
   his heel, and met the imperturbable countenance and clear sarcastic eye of Lord
       Eskdale.  
  "You have not heard anything?" asked the great noble of his brother patrician.  
  "Yes, a great deal since I have been in this room; but unfortunately it is all untrue."  
  "There is a report that Rambrooke is to have the Buck-hounds; but I cannot trace it to any
       authority."  
  "Pooh!" said Lord Eskdale.  
  "I don't see that Rambrooke should have the Buck-hounds any more than anybody else. What
       sacrifices has he made?"  
  "Past sacrifices are nothing," said Lord Eskdale. \ "Present sacrifices are the thing we
       want:—men who will sacrifice their principles, and join us."  
  "You have not heard Rambrooke's name mentioned?"  
   whether it were true that Jenny Colon was coming over.  
  Shortly after this, Henry Sydney's father, who dined with Mr. Ormsby, drew Lord Eskdale
       into a window and said in an under tone:  
  "So there is to be a kind of programme: something is to be written."  
  "Well, we want a cue," said Lord Eskdale. "I heard of this last night: Rigby has written
       something."  
  The Duke shook his head.  
  "No; Peel means to do it himself."  
  But at this moment Mr. Ormsby begged his Grace to lead them to dinner.  
  "Something is to be written." It is curious to recall the vague terms in which the first
       projection of documents, that are to exercise a vast influence on the course of affairs or
       the minds of nations, is often mentioned. This "something to be written" was written; and
       speedily; and has ever since been talked of.  
   of his administration. Its mere failure could occasion him little
       dissatisfaction; he was compensated for it by the noble opportunity afforded to him for the
       display of those great qualities, both moral and intellectual, which the swaddling-clothes of
       a routine prosperity had long repressed, but of which his opposition to the Reform Bill had
       given to the nation a very significant intimation. The brief administration elevated him in
       public opinion, and even in the eye of Europe; and it is probable that a much longer term of
       power would not have contributed more to his fame.  
   profit by its salutary uses. He would then have acceded to power as the
       representative of a Creed, instead of being the leader of a Confederacy, and he would have
       been supported by earnest and enduring enthusiasm, instead of by that churlish sufferance
       which is the result of a supposed balance of advantages in his favour. This is the
       consequence of the tactics of those short-sighted intriguers, who persisted in looking upon a
       revolution as a mere party struggle; and would not permit the mind of the nation to work
       through the inevitable phases that awaited it. In 1834 England, though frightened at the
       reality of Reform, still adhered to its phrases; it was inclined, as practical England, to
       maintain existing institutions; but, as theoretical England, it was suspicious that they were
       indefensible.  
   generation, repeating cries which they did not comprehend, and wearied with the
       endless ebullitions of their own barren conceit, that Sir Robert Peel was summoned to govern.
       It was from such materials, ample in quantity, but in all spiritual qualities most deficient;
       with great numbers, largely acred, consoled up to their chins, but without knowledge, genius,
       thought, truth, or faith, that Sir Robert Peel was to form a "great Conservative party on a
       comprehensive basis." That he did this like a dextrous politician, who can deny? Whether he
       realized those prescient views of a great statesman in which he had doubtless indulged, and
       in which, though still clogged by the leadership of 1834, he may yet find fame for himself,
       and salvation for his country, is altogether another question. His difficult attempt was
       expressed in an address to his constituents, which now ranks among state papers. We shall
       attempt briefly to consider it with the impartiality of the future.  
  
  CHAPTER V.  
  The Tamworth Manifesto of 1834 was an attempt to construct a party without
       principles; its basis therefore was necessarily Latitudinarianism; and its inevitable
       consequence has been Political Infidelity.  
   position to obtain power for their individual gratification, but it was
       impossible to secure their followers that which, after all, must be the great recompense of a
       political party, the putting in practice of their opinions; for they had none.  
  There was indeed a considerable shouting about what they called Conservative principles;
       but the awkward question naturally arose, what will you conserve? The prerogatives of the
       Crown, provided they are not exercised; the independence of the House of Lords, provided it
       is not asserted; the Ecclesiastical estate, provided it is regulated by a commission of
       laymen. Everything in short that is established, as long as it is\a phrase and not a
       fact.  
   best bargain;" some arrangement which has no principle and no purpose; except
       to obtain a temporary pause of agitation, until the mind of the Conservatives without a guide
       and without an aim, distracted, tempted, and bewildered, is prepared for another arrangement,
       equally statesmanlike with the preceding one.  
   to create, all power of resistance will be wanting; the barren curse of
       political infidelity will paralyze all action; and the Conservative Constitution will be
       discovered to be a Caput Mortuum.  
  
  CHAPTER VI.  
  In the meantime, after dinner, Tadpole and Taper, who were among the guests of Mr.
       Ormsby, withdrew to a distant sofa, out of earshot, and indulged in confidential talk.  
  "Such a strength in debate was never before found on a Treasury bench," said Mr. Tadpole;
       "the other side will be dumfounded."  
  "And what do you put our numbers at now?" inquired Mr. Taper.  
  "Would you take fifty-five for our majority?" rejoined Mr. Tadpole.  
   men to come over," said Taper. "Our friend, Sir Everard for example, it would
       settle him."  
  "He is a solemn impostor," rejoined Mr. Tadpole; "but he is a Baronet and a county member,
       and very much looked up to by the Wesleyans. The other men, I know, have refused him a
       peerage."  
  "And we might hold out judicious hopes," said Taper.  
  "No one can do that better than you," said Tadpole. "I am apt to say too much about those
       things."  
  "I make it a rule never to open my mouth on such subjects," said Taper. "A nod or a wink
       will speak volumes. An affectionate pressure of the hand will sometimes do a great deal; and
       I have promised many a peerage without committing myself by an ingenious habit of deference
       which cannot be mistaken by the future noble."  
  "I wonder what they will do with Rigby," said Tadpole.  
  "He wants a good deal," said Taper.  
   gone by when a Marquess of Monmouth was Letter A. No. 1."  
  "Very true, Mr. Tadpole. A wise man would do well now to look to the great middle class, as
       I said the other day to the electors of Shabbyton."  
  "I had sooner be supported by the Wesleyans," said Mr. Tadpole, "than by all the Marquesses
       in the peerage."  
  "At the same time," said Mr. Taper, "Rigby is a considerable man. If we want a slashing
       article—"  
  "Pooh!" said Mr. Tadpole. "He is quite gone by. He takes three months for his slashing
       articles. Give me a man who can write a leader. Rigby can't write a leader."  
  "Very few can," said Mr. Taper. "However, I don't think much of the Press. Its power is
       gone by. They overdid it."  
  "There is Tom Chudleigh," said Tadpole. "What is he to have?"  
  "Nothing, I hope," said Taper. "I hate him. A coxcomb! cracking his jokes and laughing at
       us."  
  "He has done a good deal for the party, though," said Tadpole. "That, to be sure, is only
       an additional reason for throwing him over, as he is too far committed to venture to oppose
       us. But I am afraid from something that dropped to-day, that Sir Robert thinks he has
       claims."  
  "We must stop them," said Taper, growing pale. "Fellows like Chudleigh when they once get
       in, are always in one's way. I have no objection to young noblemen being put forward, for
       they are preferred so rapidly, and then their fathers die, that in the long run they do not
       practically interfere with us."  
  "Well, his name was mentioned," said Tadpole. "There is no concealing that."  
  "I will speak to Earwig," said Taper. "He shall just drop into Sir Robert's ear by chance,
       that Chudleigh used to quiz him in the smoking room. Those little bits of information do a
       great deal of good."  
   fellows like Chudleigh. They are very well for opposition; but in office we
       don't want wits."  
  "And when shall we have the answer from Knowsley?" inquired Taper. "You anticipate no
       possible difficulty?"  
  "I tell you it is 'carte blanche,' replied Tadpole. "Four places in the Cabinet. Two
       secretaryships at the least. Do you happen to know any gentlemen of your acquaintance, Mr.
       Taper, who refuse. Secretaryships of State so easily, that you can for an instant doubt of
       the present arrangement?"  
  "I know none, indeed," said Mr. Taper with a grim smile.  
  "The thing is done," said Mr. Tadpole.  
  "And now for our cry?" said Mr. Taper.  
  "It is not a Cabinet for a good cry," said Tadpole; "but then on the other hand, it is a
       Cabinet that will sow dissension in the opposite ranks, and prevent them having a good
       cry."  
  "Ancient institutions and modern improvements, I suppose, Mr. Tadpole?"  
  "Ameliorations is the better word; ameliorations. Nobody knows exactly what it means."  
  "We go strong on the Church?" said Mr. Taper.  
  "And no Repeal of the Malt Tax; you were right, Taper. It can't be listened to for a
       moment."  
  "Something might be done with prerogative," said Mr. Taper; "the King's constitutional
       choice."  
  "Not too much," replied Mr. Tadpole. "It is a raw time yet for prerogative."  
  "Ah! Tadpole," said Mr. Taper, getting a little maudlin; "I often think, if the time should
       ever come, when you and I should be joint Secretaries of the Treasury!"  
  "We shall see, we shall see. All we have to do is to get into Parliament, work well
       together, and keep other men down."  
  "We will do our best," said Taper. "A dissolution you hold inevitable?"  
   prove a dissolution inevitable. You understand me? If the present Parliament
       goes on, where shall we be? We shall have new men cropping up every session."  
  "True, terribly true," said Mr. Taper. "That we should ever live to see a Tory government
       again! We have reason to be very thankful."  
  "Hush!" said Mr. Tadpole. "The time has gone by for Tory governments; what the country
       requires is a sound Conservative government."  
  "A sound Conservative government," said Taper musingly. "I understand: Tory men and Whig
       measures."  
  
  CHAPTER VII.  
   of which sympathy is the only sure spring. But their intimacies had been
       increased by another familiar friend. There had risen up between Coningsby and Millbank
       mutual sentiments of deep, and even ardent, regard. Acquaintance had developed the superior
       qualities of Millbank. His thoughtful and inquiring mind, his inflexible integrity, his stern
       independence, and yet the engaging union of extreme tenderness of heart with all this
       strength of character, had won the good will, and often excited the admiration, of Coningsby.
       Our hero too was gratified by the affectionate deference that was often shown to him by one
       who condescended to no other individual; he was proud of having saved the life of a member of
       their community whom masters and boys alike considered; and he ended by loving the being on
       whom he had conferred a great obligation.  
   had they not been, the example of Coningsby would soon have influenced them. He
       had obtained over his intimates the ascendant power, which is the destiny of genius. Nor was
       the submission of such spirits to be held cheap. Although they were willing to take the
       colour of their minds from him, they were in intellect and attainments, in personal
       accomplishments and general character, the leaders of the school; an authority not to be won
       from five hundred high-spirited boys without the possession of great virtues and great
       talents.  
   subject and the votary, can rival that which is exercised by the idolized
       chieftain of a great public school? What fame of after days equals the rapture of celebrity,
       that thrills the youthful medallist, as in tones of rare emotion he recites his triumphant
       verses amid the devoted plaudits of the flower of England? That's fame, that's power; real,
       unquestioned, undoubted, catholic. Alas! the schoolboy when he becomes a man, finds that
       power, even fame, like everything else, is an affair of party.  
   he heard for the first time of influential classes in the country, who were not
       noble, and were yet determined to acquire power. And although Millbank's views, which were of
       course merely caught up from his father, without the intervention of his own intelligence,
       were doubtless crude enough, and were often very acutely canvassed and satisfactorily
       demolished by the clever prejudices of another school, which Coningsby had at command, still
       they were unconsciously to the recipient materials for thought, and insensibly provoked in
       his mind a spirit of inquiry into political questions, for which he had a predisposition.  
   also agitated their young hearts. And especially the controversies that were
       now rife respecting the nature and character of ecclesiastical establishments, wonderfully
       addressed themselves to their excited intelligence. They read their newspapers with a keen
       relish, canvassed debates and criticised speeches; and although in their debating society
       which had been instituted more than a quarter of a century, discussion on topics of the day
       was prohibited, still by fixing on periods of our history when affairs were analogous to the
       present, many a youthful orator contrived very effectively to reply to Lord John, or to
       refute the fallacies of his rival.  
   privilege! A parliamentary leader who possesses it, doubles his majority; and
       he who has it not, may shroud himself in artificial reserve, and study with undignified
       arrogance an awkward haughtiness, but he will be nevertheless as far from controlling the
       spirit as from captivating the hearts of his sullen followers.  
  Notwithstanding however this very general feeling at Eton in 1835 in favour of
       "Conservative principles," and which was, in fact, nothing more than a confused and mingled
       sympathy with some great political truths, which were at the bottom of every boy's heart, but
       nowhere else, and with the personal achievements and distinction of the chieftains of the
       party; when all this hubbub had subsided, and retrospection, in the course of a year, had
       exercised its moralising influence over the more thoughtful part of the nation, inquiries, at
       first very faint and unpretending, and confined indeed for a long period to very limited,
       though inquisitive, circles, began gently to circulate—what Conservative principles were?  
   hesitating scepticism, early reached Eton. They came no doubt from the
       Universities. They were of a character however far too subtile and refined to exercise any
       immediate influence over the minds of youth. To pursue them required much previous knowledge
       and habitual thought. They were not yet publicly prosecuted by any school of politicans, or
       any section of the public press. They had not a local habitation or a name. They were
       whispered in conversation by a few. A tutor would speak of them in an esoteric vein to a
       favourite pupil, in whose abilities he had confidence, and whose future position in life
       would afford him the opportunity of influencing opinion. Among others, they fell upon the ear
       of Coningsby. They were addressed to a mind who was prepared for such researches.  
   conceded them, and the prudence of which confidence has been proved by their
       rarely abusing it. This library has been formed by subscriptions of the present and still
       more by the gifts of old Etonians. Among the honored names of these donors may be remarked
       those of the Grenvilles and Lord Wellesley; nor should we forget George IV. who enriched the
       collection with a magnificent copy of the Delphin Classics. The Institution is governed by
       six directors; the three first Collegers and the three first Oppidans for the time being. And
       the subscribers are limited to the one hundred senior members of the school.  
   do better than build a Gothic apartment for the reception of the collection. It
       cannot. be doubted that the Provost and fellows would be gratified in granting a piece of
       ground for the purpose.  
  Great were the obligations of Coningsby to this Eton Library. It introduced him to that
       historic lore, that accumulation of facts and incidents illustrative of political conduct,
       for which he had imbibed an early relish. Especially his study was directed to the annals of
       his own country, in which youth, and not only youth, is frequently so deficient. This
       collection could afford him Clarendon and Burnet, and the authentic volumes of Coxe: these
       were rich materials to one anxious to be versed in the great parliamentary story of his
       country. During the last year of his stay at Eton, when he had completed his eighteenth year,
       Coningsby led a more retired life than previously; he read much, and pondered with all the
       pride of acquisition over his increasing knowledge.  
   that in which he has hitherto sojourned; yet for which this microcosm has been
       no ill preparation. He will become more wise; will he remain as generous? His ambition may be
       as great; will it be as noble? What indeed is to be the future of this existence that is now
       to be sent forth into the great aggregate of entities? Is it an ordinary organization that
       will jostle among the crowd, and be jostled? Is it a finer temperament susceptible of
       receiving the impressions and imbibing the inspirations of superior, yet sympathizing,
       spirits? Or is it a primordial and creative mind; one that will say to his fellows, "Behold,
       God has given me thought; I have discovered truth; and you shall believe!"  
   might have distinguished a more careless glance, eager for fancied emancipation
       and passionate for a novel existence. Its expression was serious, even sad; and he covered
       his brow with his hand.  
  END OF BOOK II.  
  
  
  BOOK III.  
  CHAPTER I.  
  There are few things more full of delight and splendour, than to travel during the
       heat of a refulgent summer in the green district of some ancient forest.  
  In one of our midland counties, there is a region of this character, to which during a
       season of peculiar lustre, we would introduce the reader.  
   brake and bower, the relics retained all their original character of wildness
       and seclusion. Sometimes the green earth was thickly studded with groves of huge and vigorous
       oaks, intersected with those smooth and sunny glades that seem as if they must be cut for
       dames and knights to saunter on. Then again the undulating ground spread on all sides, far as
       the eye could range, covered with copse and fern of immense growth. Anon, you found yourself
       in a turfy wilderness girt in apparently by dark woods. And when you had wound your way a
       little through this gloomy belt, the landscape, still strictly sylvan, would beautifully
       expand with every combination and variety of woodland; while in its centre, the wild fowl
       covered the waters of a lake, and the deer basked on the knolls that abounded on its
       banks.  
   repose. The sky was deep coloured and without a cloud, save here and there a
       minute, sultry, burnished vapour, almost as glossy as the heavens. Everything was as still as
       it was bright. All seemed brooding and basking. The bee upon its wing was the only stirring
       sight, and its song the only sound.  
   heart still pure and innocent; the heart of one, who, notwithstanding all his
       high resolves and daring thoughts, was blessed with that tenderness of soul which is
       sometimes linked with an ardent imagination and a strong will. The traveller was an orphan;
       more than that—a solitary orphan. The sweet sedulousness of a mother's love, a sister's
       mystical affection, had not cultivated his early susceptibility. No soft pathos of expression
       had appealed to his childish ear. He was alone, among strangers, calmly and coldly kind. It
       must indeed have been a truly gentle disposition that could have withstood such hard neglect.
       All that he knew of the power of the softer passions might be found in the fanciful and
       romantic annals of school-boy friendship.  
   must again unite. But never with the same feelings. The space of time, passed
       in the world before they again met, would be an age of sensation, passion, experience to all
       of them. They would meet again with altered mien; with different manners, different voices.
       Their eyes would not shine with the same light; they would not speak the same words. The
       favourite phrases of their intimacy, the mystic sounds that spoke only to their initiated
       ear, they would be ashamed to use them. Yes! they might meet again; but the gushing and
       secret tenderness was gone for ever.  
   the richness of his knowledge, and the advantage of his experience, might
       strengthen and illuminate and guide his obscure or hesitating or unpractised intelligence. He
       had scarcely been fortunate in this respect, and he deeply regretted it; for he was one of
       those who was not content with excelling in his own circle, if he thought there was one
       superior to it. Absolute, not relative distinction, was his noble aim.  
  Alone, in a lonely scene, he doubly felt the solitude of his life and mind. His heart and
       his intellect seemed both to need a companion. Books, and action, and deep thought, might in
       time supply the want of that intellectual guide; but for the heart where was he to find
       solace?  
  Ah! if she would but come forth from that shining lake like a beautiful Ondine! Ah! if she
       would but step out from the green shade of that secret grove like a Dryad of sylvan Greece!
       O! mystery of mysteries! when the youth dreams his first dream over some imaginary
       heroine!  
   the bosom of the lake, soared in the air, and uttering mournful shrieks,
       whirled in agitated tumult. The deer started from their knolls, no longer sunny, stared
       around, and rushed into the woods. Coningsby raised his eyes from the turf on which they had
       been long fixed in abstraction, and he observed that the azure sky had vanished, a thin white
       film had suddenly spread itself over the heavens, and the wind moaned with a sad and fitful
       gust.  
  He had some reason to believe that on the other side of the opposite wood, the forest was
       intersected by a public road, and that there were some habitations. Immediately rising, he
       descended at a rapid pace into the valley, passed the lake, and then struck into the
       ascending wood of the bank opposite to that on which he had mused away some precious
       time.  
   the beech shrieked, the elm sent forth its deep and long-drawn groan; while
       ever and anon, amid a momentary pause, the passion of the ash was heard in moans of thrilling
       anguish.  
  Coningsby hurried on, the forest became less close. All that he aspired to was to gain more
       open country. Now he was in a rough flat land covered only here and there with some dwarf
       underwood; the horizon bounded at no great distance by a barren hill of moderate elevation.
       He gained its height with ease. He looked over a vast open country, like a wild common; in
       the extreme distance hills covered with woods; the plain intersected by two good roads; the
       sky entirely clouded, but in the distance black as ebony.  
   private room for the simple meal which they offered him. Only eggs and bacon;
       but very welcome to a pedestrian and a hungry one.  
  As he stood at the window of his little apartment, watching the large drops that were the
       heralds of the coming hurricane, and waiting for his repast, a flash of lightning illumined
       the whole country, and a horseman at full speed, followed by his groom, galloped up to the
       door.  
   of a distinguished air and figure; pale, with an impressive brow, and dark eyes
       of great intelligence.  
  "I am glad that we have both escaped the storm," said the stranger; "and I am greatly
       indebted to you for your courtesy." He slightly and graciously bowed as he spoke in a voice
       of remarkable clearness; and his manner, though easy, was touched with a degree of dignity
       that was engaging.  
  "The inn is a common home," replied Coningsby returning his salute.  
  "And free from cares," added the stranger. Then looking through the window, he said: "A
       strange storm this. I was sauntering in the sunshine, when suddenly I found I had to gallop
       for my life. 'Tis more like a white squall in the Mediterranean than anything else."  
  "I never was in the Mediterranean," said Coningsby. "There is nothing that I should like so
       much as to travel."  
  "You are travelling," rejoined his companion. "Every movement is travel, if
       understood."  
   Coningsby. "What would I not give to see Athens!"  
  "I have seen it," said the stranger, slightly shrugging his shoulders; "and more wonderful
       things. Phantoms and spectres! The Age of Ruins is past. Have you seen Manchester?"  
  "I have seen nothing," said Coningsby; "this is my first wandering. I am about to visit a
       friend who lives in this county, and I have sent on my baggage as I could. For myself, I
       determined to trust to a less common place conveyance."  
  "And seek adventures," said the stranger smiling. "Well, according to Cervantes, they
       should begin in an inn."  
  "I fear that the age of adventures is past as well as that of ruins," replied
       Coningsby.  
  "Adventures are to the adventurous," said the stranger.  
   that there were any other duties to perform in life beyond filling a
       salt-cellar or folding a napkin.  
  "She does not even look at us," said Coningsby when she had quitted the room; "and I dare
       say only a prude."  
  "She is calm," said the stranger, "because she is mistress of her subject; 'tis the secret
       of self-possession. She is here, as a Duchess at court."  
  They brought in Coningsby's meal, and he invited the stranger to join him. The invitation
       was accepted with cheerfulness.  
  "'Tis but simple fare," said Coningsby as the maiden uncovered the still hissing bacon and
       the eggs that looked like tufts of primroses.  
   There is not a princess throughout the South of Europe served with the
       cleanliness that meets us in this cottage."  
  "An inheritance from our Saxon fathers?" said Coningsby. "I apprehend the northern nations
       have a greater sense of cleanliness—of propriety—of what we call comfort?"  
  "By no means," said the stranger, "the East is the Land of the Bath. Moses and Mahomet made
       cleanliness religion."  
  "You will let me help you?" said Coningsby, offering him a plate which he had filled.  
  "I thank you," said the stranger, "but it is one of my bread days. With your permission
       this shall be my dish," and he cut from the large loaf a supply of crusts.  
  "'Tis but unsavory fare after a gallop," said Coningsby.  
   or the Irish have raised temples to tea and potatoes."  
  "But Ceres without Bacchus," said Coningsby, "how does that do? Think you, under this roof
       we could invoke the God?"  
  "Let us swear by his body that we will try," said the stranger.  
  Alas! the landlord was not a priest of Bacchus. But then these inquiries led to the finest
       perry in the world. The young men agreed they had seldom tasted anything more delicious; they
       sent for another bottle. Coningsby, who was much interested by his new companion, enjoyed
       himself amazingly.  
   was its consequence. Certainly it was difficult to ascertain his precise
       opinions on many subjects, though his manner was frank even to abandonment. And yet
       throughout his whole conversation, not a stroke of egotism, not a word, not a circumstance,
       escaped him by which you could judge of his position or purposes in life. As little did he
       seem to care to discover those of his companion. He did not by any means monopolise the
       conversation. Far from it; he continually asked questions, and while he received answers, or
       had engaged his fellow traveller in any exposition of his opinions or feelings, he listened
       with a serious and fixed attention, looking Coningsby in the face with a steadfast
       glance.  
  "I perceive," said Coningsby, pursuing a train of thought which the other had indicated,
       "that you have great confidence in the influence of individual character. I also have some
       confused persuasions of that kind. But it is not the Spirit of the Age."  
   stranger. "The Spirit of the Age is the very thing that a great man
       changes."  
  "But does not he rather avail himself of it?" inquired Coningsby.  
  "Parvenus do;" rejoined his companion, "but not prophets, great legislators, great
       conquerors. They destroy and they create."  
  "But are these times for great legislators and great conquerors?" urged Coningsby.  
  "When were they more wanted?" asked the stranger. "From the throne to the hovel all call
       for a guide. You give monarchs constitutions to teach them sovereignty, and nations
       Sunday-schools to inspire them with faith."  
  "But what is an individual!" exclaimed Coningsby, "against a vast public opinion?"  
   born? What would have been the fate of the Stuarts if Prince Henry had not
       died, and Charles I., as was intended, had been Archbishop of Canterbury?"  
  "But when men are young, they want experience," said Coningsby; "and when they have gained
       experience, they want energy."  
  "Great men never want experience," said the stranger.  
  "But everybody says that experience—"  
  "Is the best thing in the world—a treasure for you, for me, for millions. But for a
       creative mind, less than nothing. Almost everything that is great has been done by
       youth."  
  "It is at least a creed flattering to our years," said Coningsby with a smile.  
   John de Medici was a Cardinal at fifteen, and Guicciardini tells us baffled
       with his state craft Ferdinand of Arragon himself. He was Pope as Leo X. at thirty-seven.
       Luther robbed even him of his richest province at thirty-five. Take Ignatius Loyola and John
       Wesley, they worked with young brains. Ignatius was only thirty when he made his pilgrimage
       and wrote the 'Spiritual Exercises.' Pascal wrote a great work at sixteen, the greatest of
       Frenchmen and died at thirty-seven!  
   a career!" exclaimed the stranger, rising from his chair and walking up and
       down the room, "the secret sway of Europe! That was indeed a position! But it is needless to
       multiply instances. The history of Heroes is the history of Youth."  
  "Ah!" said Coningsby, "I should like to be a great man!"  
  The stranger threw at him a scrutinizing glance. His countenance was serious. He said in a
       voice of almost solemn melody:  
  "Nurture your mind with great thoughts. To believe in the heroic makes heroes."  
  "You seem to me a hero," said Coningsby in a tone of real feeling, which, half ashamed of
       his emotion, he tried to turn into playfulness.  
  "I am, and must ever be," said the stranger, "but a dreamer of dreams." Then going towards
       the window and changing into a familiar tone, as if to divert the conversation, he added;
       "What a delicious afternoon! I look forward to my ride with delight. You rest here?"  
  "No; I go on to Nottingham, where I shall sleep."  
  "And I in the opposite direction." And he rang the bell and ordered his horses.  
  "I long to see your mare again," said Coningsby. "She seemed to me so beautiful."  
  "She is not only of pure race," said the stranger, "but of the highest and rarest breed in
       Arabia. Her name is 'the Daughter of the Star.' She is a foal of that famous mare, which
       belonged to the Prince of the Wahabees; and to possess which, I believe was one of the
       principal causes of war between that tribe and the Egyptians. The Pacha of Egypt gave her to
       me, and I would not change her for her statue in pure gold, even carved by Lysippus. Come
       round to the stable and see her."  
  They went out together. It was a soft sunny afternoon; the air fresh from the rain, but
       mild and exhilarating.  
   master, and whither was she about to take him?  
  Coningsby was so naturally well-bred, that we may be sure it was not curiosity; no, it was
       a finer feeling that made him hesitate and think a little, and then say:  
  "I am sorry to part."  
  "I also," said the stranger. "But life is constant separation."  
  "I hope we may meet again," said Coningsby.  
  "If our acquaintance be worth preserving," said the stranger, "you may be sure it will not
       be lost."  
  "But mine is not worth preserving," said Coningsby earnestly. "It is yours that is the
       treasure. You teach me things of which I have long mused."  
  The stranger took the bridle of the "Daughter of the Star," and turning round with a faint
       smile, extended his hand to his companion.  
  "Your mind at least is nurtured with great thoughts," said Coningsby, "your actions should
       be heroic."  
   "I am of that faith that the Apostles professed before they followed their
       Master."  
  He vaulted into his saddle, the "Daughter of the Star" bounded away as if she scented the
       air of the Desart from which she and her rider had alike sprung, and Coningsby remained in
       profound meditation.  
  
  CHAPTER II.  
   since he was closely verging to the completion of his nineteenth year; and it
       appeared manifest that if it were his destiny to do anything great, he had but few years to
       wait before the full development of his power. Visions of Gastons de Foix and Maurices of
       Saxony, statesmen giving up cricket to govern nations, beardless Jesuits plunged in profound
       abstraction in omnipotent cabinets, haunted his fancy from the moment he had separated from
       his mysterious and deeply interesting companion. To nurture his mind with great thoughts had
       ever been Coningsby's inspiring habit. Was it also destined that he should achieve the
       heroic?  
   to in the volume just closed. What is this magic? It is the spirit of the
       supreme author that by a magnetic influence blends with our sympathizing intelligence,
       directs and inspires it. By that mysterious sensibility we extend to questions, which he has
       not treated, the same intellectual force which he has exercised over those which he has
       expounded. His genius for a time remains in us. 'Tis the same with human beings as with
       books. All of us encounter, at least once in our lives, some individual who utters words that
       make us think for ever. There are men whose phrases are oracles; who condense in a sentence
       the secrets of life; who blurt out an aphorism that forms a character or illustrates an
       existence. A great thing is a great book; but greater than all, is the talk of a great
       man!  
   feel, are not necessarily great men. A great man is one who affects the mind of
       his generation: whether he be a monk in his cloister agitating Christendom, or a monarch
       crossing the Granicus, and giving a new character to the Pagan world.  
   an intellect that would be content with nothing short of the profound.  
  His was a mind that loved to pursue every question to the centre. But it was not a spirit
       of scepticism that impelled this habit; on the contrary, it was the spirit of Faith.
       Coningsby found that he was born in an age of infidelity in all things, and his heart assured
       him that a want of faith was a want of nature. But his vigorous intellect could not take
       refuge in that maudlin substitute for belief which consists in a patronage of fantastic
       theories. He needed that deep and enduring conviction that the heart and the intellect,
       feeling and reason united, can alone supply. He asked himself why governments were hated, and
       religions despised? Why Loyalty was dead, and Reverence only a galvanised corpse?  
   juvenile investigations, as if Coningsby were speaking to him of the unknown
       tongues. But Mr. Rigby was not a man who ever confessed himself at fault. He caught up
       something of the subject as our young friend proceeded, and was perfectly prepared long
       before he had finished, to take the whole conversation into his own hands.  
   went regularly to Ascot races, he had no doubt all would go right. Finally, Mr.
       Rigby impressed on Coningsby to read the Quarterly Review with great attention; and to make
       himself master of Mr. Wordy's History of the late War in twenty volumes, a capital work,
       which proved that Providence was on the side of the Tories.  
   for this latitudinarianism, something sound and deep, fervent and well defined,
       and that the priests of this new faith must be found among the New Generation; so that when
       the bright-minded rider of the 'Daughter of the Star' descanted on the influence of
       individual character, of great thoughts and heroic actions, and the divine power of youth and
       genius, he touched a string that was the very heart-chord of his companion, who listened with
       fascinated enthusiasm, as he introduced him to his gallery of inspiring models.  
  Coningsby arrived at Beaumanoir at a season when men can neither hunt nor shoot. Great
       internal resources should be found in a country family under such circumstances. The Duke and
       Duchess had returned from London only a few days with their daughter, who had been presented
       this year. They were all glad to find themselves again in the country which they loved, and
       which loved them. One of their sons-in-law and his wife, and Henry Sydney, completed the
       party.  
   startling interest, than to meet the pretty little girl that we have gambolled
       with in our boyhood, and to find her changed in the lapse of a very few years, which in some
       instances may not have brought a corresponding alteration in our own appearance, into a
       beautiful woman. Something of this flitted over Coningsby's mind, as he bowed, a little
       agitated from his surprise, to Lady Theresa Sydney. All that he remembered had prepared him
       for beauty; but not for the degree or character of beauty that he met. It was a rich, sweet
       face, with blue eyes and dark lashes, and a nose that we have no epithet to describe in
       English, but which charmed in Roxalana. Her brown hair fell over her white and well-turned
       shoulders in long and luxuriant tresses. One has met something as brilliant and dainty in a
       medallion of old Sèvres, or amid the terraces and gardens of Watteau.  
   Though only nineteen now, he had attained his full stature, which was above the
       middle height, and time had fulfilled that promise of symmetry in his figure, and grace in
       his mien, then so largely intimated. Time too which had not yet robbed his countenance of any
       of its physical beauty, had strongly developed the intellectual charm by which it had ever
       been distinguished. As he bowed lowly before the Duchess and her daughter, it would have been
       difficult to image a youth of a mien more pre-possessing and a manner more finished.  
   had already made him in men, he could not conceive that there were any other
       women in the world than fair Geraldines and Countesses of Pembroke.  
   their embroidery frames, consulting over the arrangement of a group, or the
       colour of a flower. The panniers and fanciful baskets overflowing with variegated worsted,
       are gay and full of pleasure to the eye, and give an air of elegant business that is
       vivifying. Even the sight of employment interests.  
  Then the morning costume of English women is itself a beautiful work of art. At this period
       of the day, they can find no rivals in other climes. The brilliant complexions of the
       daughters of the north dazzle in daylight; the illumined saloon levels all distinctions. One
       should see them in their well-fashioned muslin dresses. What matrons, and what maidens! Full
       of graceful dignity, fresher than the morn! And the married beauty in her little lace cap.
       Ah, she is a coquette! A charming character at all times; in a country-house an invaluable
       one.  
   but too rare. 'Tis a career that requires great abilities, infinite pains, a
       gay and airy spirit. 'Tis the coquette that provides all amusement; suggests the riding
       party, plans the pic-nic, gives and guesses charades, acts them. She is the stirring element
       amid the heavy congeries of social atoms; the soul of the house, the salt of the banquet. Let
       any one pass a very agreeable week, or it may be ten days, under any roof and analyse the
       cause of his satisfaction, and one might safely make a gentle wager that his solution would
       present him with the frolick phantom of a coquette.  
  "It is impossible that Mr. Coningsby can remember me?" said a clear gay voice; and he
       looked round and was greeted by a pair of sparkling eyes and the gayest smile in the
       world.  
  It was Lady Everingham, the Duke's married daughter.  
  
  CHAPTER III.  
  "   And   you walked here," said Lady Everingham to Coningsby, when the stir of
       arranging themselves at dinner had subsided. "Only think, papa, Mr. Coningsby walked here! I
       also am a great walker."  
  "I had heard much of the forest," said Coningsby.  
  "Which I am sure did not disappoint you," said the Duke.  
  "But forest without adventures," said Lady Everingham, a little shrugging her pretty
       shoulders.  
  "But I had an adventure," said Coningsby.  
   with great animation. "Adventures are my weakness. I have had more adventures
       than any one. Have I not had, Augustus?" she added, addressing her husband.  
  "But you make everything out to be an adventure, Isabel," said Lord Everingham. "I dare say
       that Mr. Coningsby's was more substantial." And looking at our young friend, he invited him
       to inform them.  
  "I met a most extraordinary man," said Coningsby.  
  "It should have been a heroine!" exclaimed Lady Everingham.  
  "Do you know anybody in this neighbourhood who rides the finest Arab in the world?" asked
       Coningsby. "She is called the 'Daughter of the Star,' and was given to her rider by the Pacha
       of Egypt."  
  "This is really an adventure," said Lady Everingham interested.  
  "The Daughter of the Star!" said Lady Theresa. "What a pretty name! Percy has a horse
       called 'Sunbeam.'"  
   the Duke who was very fond of horses. "Who can it be?"  
  "Can you throw any light on this, Mr. Lyle?" asked the Duchess of a young man who sat next
       her.  
  He was a neighbour who had joined their dinner party. Eustace Lyle, a Roman Catholic, and
       the richest commoner in the county; for he had succeeded to a great estate early in his
       minority, which had only this year terminated.  
  "I certainly do not know the horse," said Mr. Lyle; "but if Mr. Coningsby would describe
       the rider, perhaps—"  
  "He is a man something under thirty," said Coningsby, "pale, with dark hair. We met in a
       sort of forest inn during a storm. A most singular man! Indeed I never met any one who seemed
       to me so clever, or to say such remarkable things."  
  "He must have been the spirit of the storm," said Lady Everingham.  
  "Charles Verney has a great deal of dark hair," said Lady Theresa. "But then he is anything
       but pale, and his eyes are blue."  
  "And certainly he keeps his wonderful things for your ear, Theresa," said her sister.  
  "I wish that Mr. Coningsby would tell us some of the wonderful things he said," said the
       Duchess smiling.  
  "Take a glass of wine first with my mother, Coningsby," said Henry Sydney, who had just
       finished helping them all to fish.  
   them, for example, a saying of a very illustrious foreign Prince, which was
       quite new and pointed, and which Coningsby told well. This led to a new train of discourse.
       The Duke also knew this illustrious foreign Prince, and told another story of him; and Lord
       Everingham had played whist with this illustrious foreign Prince very often at the
       Travellers', and this led to a third story; none of them too long. Then Lady Everingham came
       in again, and sparkled very agreeably. She indeed sustained throughout dinner the principal
       weight of the conversation; but as she asked questions of every body, all seemed to
       contribute. Even the voice of Mr. Lyle, who was rather bashful, was occasionally heard in
       reply. Coningsby, who had at first unintentionally taken a more leading part than he aspired
       to, would have retired into the background for the rest of the dinner, but Lady Everingham
       continually signalled him out for her questions, and as she sat opposite to him, he seemed
       the person to whom they were principally addressed.  
   personage in a foreign, but not remote, country, once mentioned to the writer
       of these pages, that he ascribed the superiority of the English in political life in their
       conduct of public business and practical views of affairs, in a great measure to "that little
       half hour" that separates after dinner, the dark from the fair sex. The writer humbly
       submitted, that if the period of disjunction were strictly limited to a "little half hour,"
       its salutary consequences for both sexes need not be disputed, but that in England the
       "little half hour" was too apt to swell into a term of far more awful character and duration.
       Lady Everingham was a disciple of the "very little half hour" school; for as she gaily
       followed her mother, she said to Coningsby, whose happy lot it was to usher them from the
       apartment,  
  "Pray, do not be too long at the Board of Guardians to-day."  
  These were prophetic words. For no sooner were they all again seated, than the Duke filling
       his glass, and pushing the claret to Coningsby, observed:  
  "I suppose Lord Monmouth does not trouble himself much about the New Poor Law?"  
  "Hardly," said Coningsby. "My grandfather's frequent absence from England, which his health
       I believe renders quite necessary, deprives him of the advantage of personal observation on a
       subject, than which I can myself conceive none more deeply interesting."  
  "I am glad to hear you say so," said the Duke, "and it does you great credit and Henry too,
       whose attention I observe is directed very much to these subjects. In my time, the young men
       did not think so much of such things, and we suffer consequently. By the bye, Everingham, you
       who are a chairman of a Board of Guardians, can give me some information. Supposing a case of
       out-door relief—"  
  "I could not suppose anything so absurd," said the son-in-law.  
   relief out of the Union even if the parish were to save a considerable
       sum."  
  "I wish I knew the Union where such a system was followed," said Lord Everingham; and his
       Grace seemed to tremble under his son-in-law's glance.  
  The Duke had a good heart, and not a bad head. If he had not made in his youth so many
       Latin and English verses, he might have acquired considerable information, for he had a
       natural love of letters, though his pack were the pride of England, his barrel seldom missed,
       and his fortune on the turf, where he never betted, was a proverb. He was good, and he wished
       to do good; but his views were confused from want of knowledge; and his conduct often
       inconsistent because a sense of duty made him immediately active,—and he often acquired in
       the consequent experience, a conviction exactly contrary to that which had prompted his
       activity.  
   Lord Everingham, who was a Whig, and a clear-headed, cold-blooded man, looked
       upon the New Poor Law as another Magna Charta. Lord Everingham was completely master of the
       subject. He was himself the Chairman of one of the most considerable Unions in the kingdom.
       The Duke, if he ever had a misgiving, had no chance in argument with his son-in-law. Lord
       Everingham overwhelmed him with quotations from Commissioners' rules, and Sub-Commissioners'
       reports, statistical tables, and references to dietaries. Sometimes with a strong case, the
       Duke struggled to make a fight; but Lord Everingham, when he was at fault for a reply, which
       was very rare, upbraided his father-in-law with the abuses of the old system, and frightened
       him with visions of rates exceeding rentals.  
   it would never be well for England until this order of the Peasantry was
       restored to its pristine condition; not merely in physical comfort, for that must vary
       according to the economical circumstances of the time like that of every class; but to its
       condition in all those moral attributes, which make a recognised rank in a nation; and which
       in a great degree, are independent of economics; manners, customs, ceremonies, rights, and
       privileges.  
  "Henry thinks," said Lord Everingham, "that the people are to be fed by dancing around a
       May-pole."  
  "But will the people be more fed because they do not dance round a May-pole?" urged Lord
       Henry.  
  "Obsolete customs!" said Lord Everingham.  
  "And why should dancing round a May-pole be more obsolete than holding a Chapter of the
       Garter?" asked Lord Henry.  
   customs have been permitted to fall so into desuetude."  
  "The Spirit of the Age is against such things," said Lord Everingham.  
  "And what is the Spirit of the Age?" asked Coningsby.  
  "The Spirit of Utility," said Lord Everingham.  
  "And you think then that ceremony is not useful?" urged Coningsby mildly.  
  "It depends upon circumstances," said Lord Everingham. "There are some ceremonies no doubt
       that are very proper, and of course very useful. But the best thing we can do for the
       labouring classes is to provide them with work."  
  "But what do you mean by the labouring classes, Everingham?" asked Lord Henry. "Lawyers are
       a labouring class for instance, and by the bye sufficiently provided with work. But would you
       approve of Westminster Hall being denuded of all its ceremonies?"  
  "And the long vacation being abolished?" added Coningsby.  
  "Theresa brings me terrible accounts of the sufferings of the poor about us," said the
       Duke, shaking his head.  
  "Women think everything to be suffering!" said Lord Everingham.  
  "How do you find them about you, Mr. Lyle?" continued the Duke.  
  "I have revived the monastic customs at St. Geneviève," said the young man blushing very
       much. "There is an almsgiving twice a week."  
  "I am sure I wish I could see the labouring classes happy," said the Duke.  
  "Oh! pray do not use, my dear father, that phrase the labouring classes!" said Lord Henry.
       "What do you think, Coningsby, the other day we had a meeting in this neighbourhood to vote
       an agricultural petition that was to comprise all classes. I went with my father, and I was
       made chairman of the committee to draw up the petition. Of course I described it as the
       petition of the nobility, clergy, gentry, yeomanry, and peasantry of the County of—; and
       could you believe it, they struck out   peasantry   as a word no longer used, and inserted   labourers   ."  
  "What can it signify," said Lord Everingham, "whether a man be called a labourer or a
       peasant!"  
  "And what can it signify," said his brother-in-law, "whether a man be called Mr. Howard or
       Lord Everingham!"  
  They were the most affectionate family under this roof of Beaumanoir, and of all members of
       of it Lord Henry the sweetest tempered, and yet it was astonishing what sharp skirmishes
       every day arose between him and his brother-in-law during "that little half hour," that forms
       so happily the political character of the nation. The Duke who from experience felt that a
       guerilla movement was impending, asked his guests whether they would take any more claret;
       and on their signifying their dissent, moved an adjournment to the ladies.  
   desirous of succeeding, was delighted with Lady Everingham, who instead of
       requiring to be amused, amused him; and suggested so many subjects, and glanced at so many
       topics, that there never was that cold awkward pause so common with sullen spirits and barren
       brains. Lady Everingham thoroughly understood the art of conversation, which indeed consists
       of the exercise of two fine qualities. You must originate, and you must sympathize; you must
       possess at the same time the habit of communicating, and the habit of listening. The union is
       rather rare, but irresistible.  
   foot that would have fitted the glass slipper; and which, by the bye, she lost
       no opportunity of displaying.  
  Then there was music. Lady Theresa sung like a seraph: a rich voice, a grand style. And her
       sister could support her with grace and sweetness. And they did not sing too much. The Duke
       took up a review, and looked at Rigby's last slashing article. The country seemed ruined, but
       it appeared that the Whigs were still worse off than the Tories. The assassins had committed
       suicide. This poetical justice is pleasing. Lord Everingham lounging in an easy chair perused
       with great satisfaction his Morning Chronicle, which contained a cutting reply to Mr. Rigby's
       article, not quite so "slashing" as the Right Honourable scribe's manifesto, but with some
       searching mockery, that became the subject and the subject-monger.  
   music had ceased; and Henry Sydney looked over a volume of Strutt's Sports and
       Pastimes, occasionally, without taking his eyes off the volume calling the attention of his
       friends to his discoveries.  
   and the evening terminated with the prospect of what Lady Everingham called an
       adventure.  
  The ladies themselves soon withdrew; the gentlemen lingered for a while; the Duke took up
       his candle, and bid his guests good night; Lord Everingham drank a glass of Seltzer water,
       nodded and vanished. Lord Henry and his friend sate up talking over the past. They were too
       young to call them old times; and yet what a life seemed to have elapsed since they had
       quitted Eton, dear old Eton! Their boyish feelings, and still latent boyish character,
       developed with their reminiscences.  
   Buckhurst is. I had a latter from him the other day. He has gone with his uncle
       to Paris. We shall find him at Cambridge in October. I suppose you know Millbank has gone to
       Oriel. Has he though! I wonder who will have our room at Cookesley's?— Cookesley was a good
       fellow! Oh, capital! How well he behaved when there was that row about our going out with the
       hounds! Do you remember Vere's face? It makes me laugh now when I think of it. I tell you who
       was a good fellow, Kangaroo Grey; I liked him. I don't know any fellow who sang a better
       song!"  
  "By the bye," said Coningsby, "what sort of fellow is Eustace Lyle? I rather liked his
       look."  
   but the moment he came of age, he announced that he should not mix himself up
       with either of the parties in the county, and that his tenantry might act exactly as they
       thought fit. My father thinks of course that Lyle is a Conservative, and that he only waits
       the occasion to come forward, but he is quite wrong. I know Lyle well, and he speaks to me
       without disguise. You see 'tis an old Cavalier family, and Lyle has all the opinions and
       feelings of his race. He will not ally himself with anti-monarchists, and democrats, and
       infidels, and sectarians; at the same time why should he support a party who pretend to
       oppose these, but who never lose an opportunity of insulting his religion, and would deprive
       him, if possible, of the advantages of the very institutions which his family assisted in
       establishing?"  
  "Why indeed? I am glad to have made his acquaintance," said Coningsby; "Is he clever?"  
   county. He does an amazing deal of good, and is one of the best riders we have.
       My father says the very best; bold, but so very certain."  
  "He is older than we are?"  
  "My senior by a year; he is just of age."  
  "Oh, ah! twenty one. A year younger than Gaston de Foix when he won Ravenna, and four years
       younger than John of Austria when he won Lepanto," observed Coningsby, musingly. "I vote we
       go to bed, old fellow!"  
  
  CHAPTER IV.  
   the peculiar and most picturesque feature of this splendid residence. The
       wooded heights that formed the valley, were not, as they first appeared, a range of hills.
       Their crest was only the abrupt termination of a vast and enclosed table-land, abounding in
       all the qualities of the ancient chase; turf and trees, a wilderness of underwood, and a vast
       spread of gorse and fern. The deer, that abounded, lived here in a world as savage as
       themselves: trooping down in the evening to the river. Some of them indeed were ever in sight
       of those who were in the valley, and you might often observe various groups clustered on the
       green heights above the mansion, the effect of which was most inspiriting and graceful.
       Sometimes in the twilight, a solitary form, magnified by the illusive hour, might be seen
       standing on the brink of the steep, large and black against the clear sky.  
   which gave to the dwellers in it a view over an extensive and richly cultivated
       country. It was through this district that the party from Beaumanoir had pursued their way.
       The first glance at the building, its striking situation, its beautiful form, its brilliant
       colour, its great extent, a gathering as it seemed of galleries, halls, and chapels,
       mullioned windows, portals of clustered columns, and groups of airy pinnacles and fretwork
       spires, called forth a general cry of wonder and praise.  
  The ride from Beaumanoir had been delightful; the breath of summer in every breeze, the
       light of summer on every tree. The gay laugh of Lady Everingham rang frequently in the air;
       often were her sunny eyes directed to Coningsby, as she called his attention to some fair
       object or some pretty effect. She played the hostess of Nature and introduced him to all the
       beauties.  
   Duchess, and indicated their gently-descending route.  
  They arrived, and the peacocks, who were sunning themselves on the turrets, expanded their
       plumage to welcome them.  
  "I can remember the old house," said the Duchess as she took Mr. Lyle's arm; "and I am
       happy to see the new one. The Duke had prepared me for much beauty, but the reality exceeds
       his report."  
   source of great excitement to Henry Sydney, who always lamented his ill-luck in
       not living in such days; nay, would insist that all others must equally deplore their evil
       destiny.  
  "See, Coningsby, this battery on the Upper Park," said Lord Henry. "This did the business:
       how it rakes up the valley! Sir Eustace works it himself. Mother, what a pity that Beaumanoir
       was not besieged!"  
  "It may be," said Coningsby.  
  "I always fancy a siege must be so very interesting," said Lady Everingham. "It must be so
       exciting."  
  "I hope the next siege may be at Beaumanoir, instead of St. Geneviève," said Lyle laughing;
       "as Henry Sydney has such a military predisposition. Duchess, you said the other day that you
       liked Malvoisie, and here is some." "Now broach me a cask of Malvoisie,    Bring pasty of the
       doe;" said the Duchess. "That has been my luncheon"  
  "A poetic repast," said Lady Theresa.  
  "Their breeds of sheep must have been very inferior in old days," said Lord Everingham, "as
       they made such a noise about their venison. For my part, I consider it a thing as much gone
       by as tilts and tournaments."  
  "I am very sorry that they have gone by," said Lady Theresa.  
  "Everything has gone by that is beautiful," said Lord Henry.  
  "Life is much easier," said Lord Everingham.  
  "Life easy!" said Lord Henry. "Life appears to me to be a fierce struggle."  
  "Manners are easy," said Coningsby, "and life is hard."  
  "And I wish to see things exactly the reverse," said Lord Henry. "The means and modes of
       subsistence less difficult; the conduct of life more ceremonious."  
  "Civilization has no time for ceremony," said Lord Everingham.  
  "How very sententious you all are," said his wife. "I want to see the hall and many other
       things." And they all rose.  
   crowned by a master-piece of Carlo Dolce and surrounded by a silver rail, the
       tone of rich and solemn light that pervaded all, and blended all the various sources of
       beauty into one absorbing and harmonious whole; all combined to produce an effect that
       stilled them into a silence that lasted for some minutes, until the ladies breathed their
       feelings in an almost inarticulate murmur of reverence and admiration; while a tear stole to
       the eye of the enthusiastic Henry Sydney.  
  Leaving the chapel they sauntered through the gardens, until arriving at their limit, they
       were met by the prettiest sight in the world; a group of little pony chairs, each drawn by a
       little fat fawn-coloured pony, like the one that Mr. Lyle had been riding. Lord Henry drove
       his mother; Lord Everingham Lady Theresa; Lady Everingham was attended by Coningsby. Their
       host cantered by the Duchesses side, and along winding roads of very easy ascent, leading
       through the most beautiful woods, and offering the most charming landscapes, they reached in
       due time the Upper Park.  
   his own house," said Lady Everingham. "He is scarcely the same person. I have
       not observed him once blush. He speaks and moves with ease. It is a pity that he is not more
       graceful. Above all things I like a graceful man."  
  "That chapel," said Coningsby, "was a fine thing."  
  "Very," said Lady Everingham. "Did you observe the picture over the altar; the Virgin with
       blue eyes? I never observed blue eyes before in such a picture. What is your favourite colour
       for eyes?"  
  Coningsby felt embarrassed; he said something rather pointless about admiring everything
       that is beautiful.  
  "But every one has a favourite style; I want to know yours. Regular features—do you like
       regular features? Or is it expression that pleases you?"  
  "Expression; I think I like expression. Expression must be always delightful."  
  "Do you dance?"  
  "No, I am no great dancer. I fear I have very few accomplishments. I am very fond of
       fencing."  
  "I don't fence," said Lady Everingham with a smile. "But I think you are right not to
       dance. It is not in your way. You are very ambitious I believe?" she added.  
  "I was not aware of it; everybody is ambitious."  
  "You see I know something of your character. Henry has spoken of you to me a great deal;
       long before we met—met again I should say, for we are very old friends, remember. Do you know
       your career very much interests me? I like ambitious men."  
  There is something very fascinating in the first idea that your career interests a charming
       woman. Coningsby felt that he was perhaps driving a Madame de Longueville. A woman who likes
       ambitious men must be no ordinary character; clearly a sort of heroine. At this moment they
       reached the Upper Park, and the novel landscape changed the current of their remarks.  
   was greatly compensated by the multitude and prodigious size of the trees; they
       were the largest indeed that could be well met with in England, and there is no part of
       Europe where the timber is so huge. The broad interminable glades, the vast avenues, the
       quantity of deer browsing or bounding in all directions, the thickets of yellow gorse and
       green fern, and the breeze that even in the stillness of summer was ever playing over this
       table land, all produced an animated and renovating scene. It was like suddenly visiting
       another country, living among other manners, and breathing another air. They stopped for a
       few minutes at a pavilion built for the purposes of the chace, and then returned, all
       gratified by this visit to what appeared to be the higher regions of the earth.  
  As they approached the brow of the hill, that hung over St. Geneviève, they heard the great
       bell sound.  
  "What is that?" asked the Duchess.  
   with which I am connected come to St. Geneviève twice a week at this hour."  
  "And what is your system?" inquired Lord Everingham, who had stopped, interested by the
       scene. "What check have you?"  
  "The rectors of the different parishes grant certificates to those who in their belief
       merit bounty according to the rules which I have established. These again are visited by my
       Almoner, who countersigns the certificate, and then they present it at the postern-gate. The
       certificate explains the nature of their necessities, and my steward acts on his
       discretion."  
  "Mamma, I see them," exclaimed Lady Theresa.  
  "Perhaps your Grace may think that they might be relieved without all this ceremony," said
       Mr. Lyle, extremely confused. "But I agree with Henry and Mr. Coningsby that Ceremony is not,
       as too commonly supposed, an idle form, I wish the people constantly and visibly to
       comprehend that Property is their protector and their friend."  
  "My reason is with you, Mr. Lyle," said the Duchess, "as well as my heart."  
  They came along the valley, a procession of Nature, whose groups an artist might have
       studied. The old man, who loved the pilgrimage too much to avail himself of the privilege of
       a substitute accorded to his grey hairs. He came in person with his grand-child and his
       staff. There also came the widow with her child at the breast, and others clinging to her
       form; some sorrowful faces, and some pale; many a serious one; and now and then a frolic
       glance; many a dame in her red cloak, and many a maiden with her light basket, curly-headed
       urchins with demure looks, and sometimes a stalwart form baffled for a time of the labour
       which he desired. But not a heart there that did not bless the bell that sounded from the
       tower of St. Geneviève!  
  
  CHAPTER V.  
  "   My   Church; a "Catholic and Apostolic Church," as it daily declares itself.
       Besides, it was our friend. When we were persecuted by Puritanic Parliaments, it was the
       Sovereign and the Church of England that interposed, with the certainty of creating against
       themselves odium and mistrust, to shield us from the dark and relentless bigotry of
       Calvinism."  
  "I believe," said Coningsby, "that if Charles I had hanged all the Catholic priests that
       Parliament petitioned him to execute, he would never have lost his crown."  
  "You were mentioning my father," continued Lyle. "He certainly was a Whig. Galled by
       political exclusion, he connected himself with that party in the state, which began to
       intimate emancipation. After all, they did not emancipate us. It was the fall of the Papacy
       in England that founded the Whig aristocracy; a fact that must always lie at the bottom of
       their hearts; and I assure you does of mine.  
   we should aspire to establish? It seems to me a barren thing—this
       Conservativism—an unhappy cross-breed, the mule of politics that engenders nothing. What do
       you think of all this, Coningsby? I assure you I feel confused, perplexed, harassed. I know I
       have public duties to perform; I am in fact every day of my life solicited by all parties to
       throw the weight of my influence in one scale or another; but I am paralysed. I often wish I
       had no position in the country. The sense of its responsibility depresses me; makes me
       miserable. I speak to you without reserve; with a frankness which our short acquaintance
       scarcely authorizes; but Henry Sydney has talked of you so often to me, and I have so long
       wished to I know you, that I open my heart without restraint."  
   vague, conviction, that there are still great truths, if we could but work them
       out; that Government for instance should be loved and not hated, and that Religion should be
       a faith and not a form."  
   past life, resumed the exercise of gentle offices, as if she had never ceased
       to be a daughter of the house, and as if another domain had not its claims upon her
       solicitude. Coningsby was often the companion of herself and her sister in their pilgrimages
       of charity and kindness. He admired the graceful energy, and thorough acquaintance with
       details, with which Lady Everingham superintended schools, organized societies of relief, and
       the discrimination which she brought to bear upon individual cases of suffering or
       misfortune. He was deeply interested as he watched the magic of her manner, as she melted the
       obdurate, inspired the slothful, consoled the afflicted, and animated with her smiles and
       ready phrase, the energetic and the dutiful. Nor on these occasions was Lady Theresa seen
       under less favourable auspices. Without the vivacity of her sister, there was in her
       demeanour a sweet seriousness of purpose that was most winning; and sometimes a burst of
       energy, a trait of decision, which strikingly contrasted with the somewhat over-controlled
       character of her life in drawing-rooms.  
  In the society of these engaging companions, time for Coningsby glided away in a course
       which he sometimes wished nothing might disturb. Apart from them, he frequently felt himself
       pensive and vaguely disquieted. Even the society of Henry Sydney, or Eustace Lyle, much as
       under ordinary circumstances they would have been adapted to his mood, did not compensate for
       the absence of that indefinite, that novel, that strange, yet sweet excitement, which he
       felt, he knew not exactly how or why, stealing over his senses. Sometimes the countenance of
       Theresa Sydney flitted over his musing vision; sometimes the merry voice of Lady Everingham
       haunted his ear. But to be their companion in ride or ramble; to avoid any arrangement which
       for many hours should deprive him of their presence; was every day with Coningsby a principal
       object.  
   want of Lady Everingham's conversation, that was ever so poignant and so
       interestingly personal to himself; one of the secrets of her sway, though Coningsby was not
       then quite conscious of it. Talk to a man about himself, and he is generally captivated. That
       is the real way to win him. The only difference between men and women in this respect is,
       that most women are vain, and some men are not. There are some men who have no self-love; but
       if they have, female vanity is but a trifling and airy passion compared with the vast
       voracity of appetite which in the sterner sex can swallow anything, and always crave for
       more.  
   had an animated glance, eyes sparkling with intelligence and interest; not a
       word was disregarded. Coningsby did not advance as was his custom; he had a sort of instinct,
       that the stranger was discoursing of matters of which he knew nothing. He turned to a table,
       he took up a book, which he began to read upside downwards. A hand was lightly placed on his
       shoulder. He looked round, it was another stranger; who said, however, in a tone of familiar
       friendliness:  
  "How do you do, Coningsby?"  
  It was a young man about four and twenty years of age, very tall, very good looking. Old
       recollections, his intimate greeting, a strong family likeness, helped Coningsby to
       conjecture correctly who was the person who addressed him. It was, indeed, the eldest son of
       the Duke, the Marquess of Beaumanoir, who had arrived at his father's unexpectedly with his
       friend, Mr. Melton, on their way to the north.  
   air that commanded attention, and manners, though facile, sufficiently
       finished. He was very communicative, though calm, and without being witty, had at his service
       a turn of phrase, acquired by practice and success, which was, or which always seemed to be,
       poignant. The ladies seemed especially to be delighted at his arrival. He knew every thing of
       every body they cared about; and Coningsby listened in silence to names which for the first
       time reached his ears, but which seemed to excite great interest. Mr. Melton frequently
       addressed his most lively observations and his most sparkling anecdotes to Lady Everingham,
       who evidently relished all that he said, and returned him in kind.  
  Throughout the dinner Lady Everingham and Mr. Melton maintained what appeared a most
       entertaining conversation, principally about things and persons which did not in any way
       interest our hero; who, however, had the satisfaction of hearing Lady Everingham in the
       drawing-room say in a careless tone to the Duchess:  
  "I am so glad, mamma, that Mr. Melton has come; we wanted some amusement."  
  What a confession! What a revelation to Coningsby of his infinite insignificance! Coningsby
       entertained a great aversion for Mr. Melton, but felt his spirit unequal to the social
       contest. The genius of the untutored inexperienced youth quailed before that of the long
       practised, skillful, man of the world. What was the magic of this man? What was the secret of
       this ease, that nothing could disturb and yet was not deficient in deference and good taste?
       And then his dress, it seemed fashioned by some unearthly artist; yet it was impossible to
       detect the unobtrusive causes of the general effect that was irresistible. Coningsby's coat
       was made by Stultz; almost every fellow in the sixth form had his coats made by Stultz; yet
       Coningsby fancied that his own garment looked as if it had been furnished by some rustic
       slopseller. He began to wonder where Mr. Melton got his boots from, and glanced at his own,
       which though made in St. James' Street, seemed to him to have a cloddish air.  
   intended to have remained at Beaumanoir until that time; but suddenly it
       occurred to him, that the Age of Ruins was past, and that he ought to seize the opportunity
       of visiting Manchester, which was in the same county as the Castle of his grandfather. So
       difficult is it to speculate upon events! Muse as we may, we are the creatures of
       circumstances; and the unexpected arrival of a London dandy at the country seat of an English
       nobleman sent this representative of the New Generation, fresh from Eton, nursed in
       prejudices, yet with a mind predisposed to inquiry and prone to meditation, to a scene apt to
       stimulate both intellectual processes; which demanded investigation and induced thought—the
       great   Metropolis   of   Labour   .  
  END OF VOL. I.  
 / 
  
  
  
  VOL. II.  
  BOOK IV.  
  CHAPTER I.  
  A great city, whose image dwells in the memory of man, is the type of some great
       idea. Rome represents Conquest; Faith hovers over the towers of Jerusalem; and Athens
       embodies the pre-eminent quality of the antique world— Art.  
  In modern ages, Commerce has created London; while Manners, in the most comprehensive sense
       of the word, have long found a
        /  supreme capital in the airy and bright-minded city of the Seine.  
  What Art was to the ancient world, Science is to the modern: the distinctive faculty. In
       the minds of men the useful has succeeded to the beautiful. Instead of the city of the Violet
       Crown, a Lancashire village has expanded into a mighty region of factories and warehouses.
       Yet rightly understood, Manchester is as great a human exploit as Athens.  
  The inhabitants indeed are not as impressed with their idiosyncrasy as the countrymen of
       Pericles and Phidias. They do not fully comprehend the position which they occupy. It is the
       philosopher alone who can comprehend the inconceivable grandeur of Manchester, and the
       immensity of its future. There are yet great truths to tell, if we had either the courage to
       announce or the temper to receive them.  
 / 
  
  CHAPTER II.  
  A feeling of melancholy, even of uneasiness, attends our first entrance into a
       great town, especially at night. Is it that the sense of all this vast existence with which
       we have no connexion, where we are utterly unknown, oppresses us with our insignificance? Is
       it that it is terrible to feel friendless where all have friends?  
  Yet reverse the picture. Behold a community where you are unknown, but where you will be
       known, perhaps honoured. A place where you have no friends, but where also you have no
       enemies. A spot that has hitherto been a blank in your thoughts, as you have been a cipher in
       its sensations, and yet a spot perhaps pregnant with your destiny!  
 / 
  There is perhaps no act of memory so profoundly interesting as to recall the careless mood
       and moment in which we have entered a town, a house, a chamber, on the eve of an acquaintance
       or an event, that have given a colour and an impulse to our future life.  
  What is this Fatality that men worship? Is it a Goddess?  
  Unquestionably it is a power that acts mainly by female agents. Women are the Priestesses
       of Predestination.  
  Man conceives Fortune, but Woman conducts it.  
  It is the Spirit of Man that says, "I will be great;" but it is the Sympathy of Woman that
       usually makes him so.  
  It was not the comely and courteous hostess of the Adelphi Hotel, Manchester, that gave
       occasion to these remarks, though she may deserve them, and though she was most kind to our
       Coningsby as he came in late at night very tired, and not in very good humour.  
  He had travelled the whole day through the great district of labour, his mind excited by
        /  strange sights, and at length wearied by their multiplication. He had passed over the
       plains where iron and coal supersede turf and corn, dingy as the entrance of Hades, and
       flaming with furnaces; and now he was among illumined factories with more windows than
       Italian palaces, and smoking chimneys taller than Egyptian obelisks. Alone in the great
       metropolis of machinery itself, sitting down in a solitary coffee-room glaring with gas, with
       no appetite, a whirling head, and not a plan or purpose for the morrow. And why was he here?
       Because a being, whose name even was unknown to him, had met him in a hedge ale-house during
       a thunder storm, and told him that the Age of Ruins was past.  
  Remarkable instance of the influence of an individual; some evidence of the extreme
       susceptibility of our hero.  
  Even his bed-room was lit by gas. Wonderful city! That however could be got rid of. He
       opened the window. The summer air was sweet, even in this land of smoke and toil. He feels a
       sensation such as in Lisbon or Lima
        /  precedes an earthquake. The house appears to quiver. It is a sympathetic affection
       occasioned by a steam-engine in a neighbouring factory.  
  Notwithstanding however all these novel incidents, Coningsby slept the deep sleep of youth
       and health, of a brain, which however occasionally perplexed by thought, had never been
       harassed by anxiety. He rose early, freshened and in fine spirits. And by the time the
       deviled chicken and the buttered toast, that mysterious and incomparable luxury, which only
       can be obtained at an inn, had disappeared, he felt all the delightful excitement of
       travel.  
  And now for action! Not a letter had Coningsby, not an individual in that vast city was
       known to him. He went to consult his kind hostess, who smiled confidence. He was to mention
       her name at one place, his own at another. All would be right; she seemed to have reliance in
       the destiny of such a nice young man.  
  He saw all; they were kind and hospitable to the young stranger, whose thought, and
       earnestness, and gentle manners, attracted them.
        /  One recommended him to another; all tried to aid and to assist him. He entered chambers
       vaster than are told of in Arabian fable, and peopled with habitants more wondrous than
       Afrite or Peri. For there he beheld, in long-continued ranks, those mysterious forms full of
       existence without life, that perform with facility and in an instant, what man can fulfil
       only with difficulty and in days. A machine is a slave that neither brings nor bears
       degradation: it is a being endowed with the greatest degree of energy and acting under the
       greatest degree of excitement, yet free at the same time from all passion and emotion. It is
       therefore not only a slave, but a supernatural slave. And why should one say that the machine
       does not live? It breathes, for its breath forms the atmosphere of some towns. It moves with
       more regularity than man. And has it not a voice. Does not the spindle sing like a merry girl
       at her work, and the steam-engine roar in jolly chorus like a strong artizan handling his
       lusty tools, and gaining a fair day's wages for a fair day's toil?  
 / 
  Nor should the weaving-room be forgotten, where a thousand or fifteen hundred girls may be
       observed in their coral necklaces working like Penelope in the day time; some pretty, some
       pert, some graceful and jocund, some absorbed in their occupation; a little serious some, few
       sad. And the cotton you have observed in its rude state, that you have seen the silent
       spinner change into thread, and the bustling weaver convert into cloth, you may now watch as
       in a moment it is tinted with beautiful colours, or printed with fanciful patterns. And yet
       the mystery of mysteries is to view machines making machines; a spectacle that fills the mind
       with curious, and even awful, speculation.  
  From early morn to the late twilight, our Coningsby for several days devoted himself to the
       comprehension of Manchester. It was to him a new world pregnant with new ideas, and
       suggestive of new trains of thought and feeling. In this unprecedented partnership between
       capital and science, working on a spot which Nature had indicated as the fitting theatre of
       their exploits, he beheld a great source of the wealth
        /  of nations which had been reserved for these times, and he perceived that this wealth
       was rapidly developing classes whose power was very imperfectly recognised in the
       constitutional scheme, and whose duties in the social system seemed altogether omitted. Young
       as he was, the bent of his mind, and the inquisitive spirit of the times, had sufficiently
       prepared him, not indeed to grapple with these questions, but to be sensible of their
       existence, and to ponder.  
  One evening, in the coffee-room of the hotel, having just finished his well-earned dinner,
       and relaxing his mind for the moment in a fresh research into the Manchester Guide, an
       individual, who had also been dining in the same apartment, rose from his table, and after
       lolling over the empty fire-place, reading the framed announcements, looking at the
       directions of several letters waiting there for their owners; picking his teeth, he turned
       round to Coningsby and with an air of uneasy familiarity, said,  
  "First visit to Manchester, sir?"  
  "My first."  
  "Gentleman traveller, I presume?"  
  "I am a traveller," said Coningsby.  
  "Hem!—From the south?"  
  "From the south."  
  "And pray, sir, how did you find business as you came along. Brisk? I dare say. And yet
       there is a something, a sort of a something; didn't it strike you, sir, there was a
       something? A deal of queer paper about, sir!"  
  "I fear you are speaking on a subject of which I know nothing," said Coningsby, smiling, "I
       do not understand business at all; though I am not surprised that being at Manchester you
       should suppose so."  
  "Ah! not in business. Hem! Professional?"  
  "No," said Coningsby, "I am nothing."  
  "Ah! an independent gent; hem! and a very pleasant thing, too. Pleased with Manchester, I
       dare say?" continued the stranger.  
  "And astonished," said Coningsby, "I think in the whole course of my life I never saw so
       much to admire."  
  "Seen all the lions, have no doubt?"  
  "I think I have seen everything," said Coningsby, rather eager and with some pride.  
  "Very well, very well," exclaimed the stranger in a patronising tone. "Seen Mr. Burley's
       weaving-room, I dare say."  
  "Oh! isn't it wonderful?" said Coningsby.  
  "A great many people," said the stranger, with a rather supercilious smile.  
  "But after all," said Coningsby with animation, "it is the machinery without any
       interposition of manual power that overwhelms me. It haunts me in my dreams," continued
       Coningsby.  
  "I see cities peopled with machines. Certainly Manchester is the most wonderful city of
       modern times!"  
  The stranger stared a little at the enthusiasm of his companion, and then picked his
       teeth.  
  "Of all the wonderful things here," said Coningsby, "what on the whole, sir, do you look
       upon as the most wonderful?"  
  "In the way of machinery?" asked the stranger.  
  "In the way of machinery."  
  "Why, in the way of machinery, you know," said the stranger very quietly, "Manchester is a
       dead letter."  
  "A dead letter!" said Coningsby.  
  "Dead and buried," said the stranger, accompanying his words with that peculiar application
       of his thumb to his nose, that signifies so eloquently that all is up.  
  "You astonish me!" said Coningsby.  
  "It's a booked place though," said the stranger, "and no mistake. We have all of us a very
       great respect for Manchester, in course; look upon her as a sort of mother, and all that sort
       of thing. But she is behind the times, sir, and that won't do in this age. The long and the
       short of it is, Manchester is gone by."  
  "I thought her only fault might be she was too much in advance of the rest of the country,"
       said Coningsby very innocently.  
  "If you want to see life," said the stranger, "go to Staley-bridge or Bolton. There's high
       pressure."  
  "But the population of Manchester is increasing," said Coningsby.  
   a good deal of capital in the place. And it has some first-rate Institutions.
       There's the Manchester Bank. That's a noble institution, full of commercial enterprise;
       understands the age, sir; high-pressure to the back-bone. I came up to town to see the
       manager to-day. I am building a new mill now myself at Staley-Bridge, and mean to open it by
       January, and when I do, I'll give you leave to pay another visit to Mr. Burley's weaving-room
       with my compliments."  
  "I am very sorry," said Coningsby, "that I have only another day left; but pray tell me,
       what would you recommend me most to see within a reasonable distance of Manchester?"  
   face, or even Mr. Ashworth's that day. And the Oxford Road Works, where they are
       always making a little change, bit by bit reform, eh! not a very particular fine appetite I
       suspect for dinner at the Oxford Road Works, the day they hear of my new mill being at work.
       But you want to see something tip-top. Well, there's Millbank; that's regular slap-up—quite a
       sight, regular lion; if I were you, I would see Millbank."  
  "Millbank!" said Coningsby; "what Millbank?"  
  "Millbank of Millbank, made the place, made it himself. About three miles from Bolton;
       train to-morrow morning at 7-25, get a fly at the station, and you will be at Millbank by
       8-40."  
  "Unfortunately I am engaged to-morrow morning," said Coningsby, "and yet I am most anxious,
       particularly anxious, to see Millbank."  
  "Well, there's a late train," said the stranger, "3-15; you will be there by 4-30."  
  "I think I could manage that," said Coningsby.  
  "Do," said the stranger; "and if you ever find yourself at Staley-Bridge, I shall be very
       happy to be of service. I must be off now. My train goes at 9-15." And he presented Coningsby
       with his card as he wished him good night.  
  MR. G. O. A. HEAD,  
    Staley Bridge   .  
  
  CHAPTER III.  
   wings in the same style, which form a large court, completed by a dwarf wall
       crowned with a light and rather elegant railing; in the centre, the principal entrance, a
       lofty portal of bold and beautiful design, surmounted by a statue of Commerce.  
  This building, not without a degree of dignity, is what is technically and not very
       felicitously called a mill; always translated by the French in their accounts of our
       manufacturing riots, "moulin"; and which really was the principal factory of Oswald Millbank,
       the father of that youth, whom we trust our readers have not quite forgotten.  
   residence and a school-house of similar design. The village too could boast of
       another public building; an Institute where there were a library and a lecture-room; and a
       reading hall which any one might frequent at certain hours, and under reasonable
       regulations.  
  On the other side of the principal factory, but more remote, about half-a-mile indeed up
       the valley, surrounded by beautiful meadows, and built on an agreeable and well-wooded
       elevation was the mansion of the mill-owner; apparently a commodious and not inconsiderable
       dwellinghouse, built in what is called the villa-style, with a variety of gardens and
       conservatories. The atmosphere of this somewhat striking settlement was not disturbed and
       polluted by the dark vapour, which to the shame of Manchester still infests that great town,
       for the river of the valley was a motive power which rendered the steam-engine unnecessary,
       though doubtless had its presence been inevitable, Mr. Millbank, unlike the inhabitants of
       Manchester, would have taken care to consume his own smoke.  
   at Millbank, and the gratification which he experienced on first beholding it
       was not a little diminished, when on inquiring at the village, he was informed that the hour
       was past for seeing the works. Determined not to relinquish his purpose without a struggle,
       he repaired to the principal mill, and entered the counting-house, which was situated in one
       of the wings of the building.  
  "Your pleasure, sir?" said one of three individuals sitting on high stools behind a high
       desk.  
  "I wish, if possible, to see the works."  
  "Quite impossible, sir," and the clerk withdrawing his glance, continued his writing. "No
       admission without an order, and no admission with an order after two o'clock."  
  "I am very unfortunate," said Coningsby.  
  "Sorry for it, sir. Give me ledger K. X., will you Mr. Benson?"  
  "I think, Mr. Millbank would grant me permission," said Coningsby.  
   pointed to an inner counting-house, and the glass doors permitted Coningsby to
       observe several individuals in close converse.  
  "Perhaps his son, Mr. Oswald Millbank is here?" inquired Coningsby.  
  "Mr. Oswald is in Belgium," said the clerk.  
  "Would you give a message to Mr. Millbank, and say a friend of his son's at Eton is here,
       and here only for a day, and wishes very much to see his works?"  
  "Can't possibly disturb Mr. Millbank now, sir; but, if you like to sit down, you can wait
       and see him yourself."  
  Coningsby was content to sit down, though he grew very impatient at the end of a quarter of
       an hour. The ticking of the clock, the scratching of the pens of the three silent clerks,
       irritated him. At length voices were heard, doors opened, and a clerk said: "Mr. Millbank is
       coming, sir," but nobody came; voices became hushed, doors were again shut; again nothing was
       heard, save ticking of clock and scratching of pen.  
   all did come forth, Mr. Millbank among them, a well-proportioned, comely man,
       with a fair face inclining to ruddiness, a quick, glancing, hazel eye, the whitest teeth, and
       short, curly, chestnut hair, here and there slightly tinged with grey. It was a visage of
       energy and decision.  
  He was about to pass through the counting-house with his companions with whom his affairs
       were not concluded, when he observed Coningsby, who had risen.  
  "This gentleman wishes to see me?" he inquired of his clerk, who bowed assent.  
  "I shall be at your service, sir, the moment I have finished with these gentlemen."  
  "The gentleman wishes to see the works, sir," said the clerk.  
  "He can see the works at proper times," said Mr. Millbank, somewhat pettishly; "tell him
       the regulations," and he was about to go.  
  "I beg your pardon, sir," said Coningsby, coming forward, and with an air of earnestness
       and grace that arrested the step of the manufacturer. "I am aware of the regulations, but I
       would beg to be permitted to infringe them."  
  "It cannot be, sir," said Mr. Millbank, moving.  
  "I thought, sir, being here only for a day, and as a friend of your son—"  
  Mr. Millbank stopped and said:  
  "Oh! a friend of Oswald's, eh? What, at Eton?"  
  "Yes, sir, at Eton; and I had hoped perhaps to have found him here."  
  "I am very much engaged, sir, at this moment," said Mr. Millbank; "I am sorry I cannot pay
       you any personal attention, but my clerk will show you everything. Mr. Benson, let this
       gentleman see everything," and he withdrew.  
  "Be pleased to write your name here, sir," said Mr. Benson, opening a book, and our friend
       wrote his name and the date of his visit to Millbank.  
  " Harry Coningsby, Sept . 2, 1836."  
   the skill and power of his order, as to obtain a return for the great
       investment.  
  "It is the glory of Lancashire!" exclaimed the enthusiastic Mr. Benson.  
  The clerk spoke freely of his master, whom he evidently idolized, and his great
       achievements, and Coningsby encouraged him. He detailed to Coningsby the plans which Mr.
       Millbank had pursued both for the moral and physical well-being of his people; how he had
       built churches, and schools, and institutes; houses and cottages on a new system of
       ventilation; how he had allotted gardens; established singing classes.  
  "Here is Mr. Millbank," continued the clerk, as he and Coningsby, quitting the factory,
       re-entered the court.  
  Mr. Millbank was approaching the factory, and the moment that he observed them, he
       quickened his pace.  
  "Mr. Coningsby?" he said when he reached them. His countenance was rather disturbed, and
       his voice a little trembled, and he looked on our friend with a glance scrutinizing and
       serious. Coningsby bowed.  
  "I am sorry that you should have been received at this place with so little ceremony, sir,"
       said Mr. Millbank; "but had your name been mentioned, you would have found it cherished
       here." He nodded to the clerk, who disappeared.  
  Coningsby began to talk about the wonders of the factory, but Mr. Millbank recurred to
       other thoughts that were passing in his mind. He spoke of his son; he expressed a kind
       reproach that Coningsby should have thought of visiting this part of the world without giving
       them some notice of his intention, that he might have been their guest, that Oswald might
       have made arrangements that he should see everything and in the best manner in short, that
       they might all have shown however slightly, the deep sense of their obligations to him.  
   my journey to view this famous district of industry. It is some days since I
       ought to have found myself at Coningsby, and this is the reason why I am so pressed."  
  A cloud passed over the countenance of Millbank as the name of Lord Monmouth was mentioned,
       but he said nothing. Turning towards Coningsby, with an air of kindness:  
  "At least," said he, "let not Oswald hear that you did not taste our salt. Pray dine with
       me to-day; there is yet an hour to dinner; and as you have seen the factory, suppose we
       stroll together through the village."  
  
  CHAPTER IV.  
  The village clock struck five as Mr. Millbank and his guest entered the gardens of
       his mansion. Coningsby lingered a moment to admire the beauty and gay profusion of the
       flowers.  
  "Your situation," said Coningsby, looking up the green and silent valley, "is absolutely
       poetic."  
  "I try sometimes to fancy," said Mr. Millbank, with a rather fierce smile, "that I am in
       the New World."  
   "Papa! papa!" and instantly a young girl came bounding down the stairs, but
       suddenly seeing a stranger with her father she stopped upon the landing place and was
       evidently on the point of as rapidly retreating as she had advanced, when Mr. Millbank waved
       his hand to her and begged her to descend. She came down slowly: as she approached them her
       father said: "A friend you have often heard of Edith: this is Mr. Coningsby."  
  She started; blushed very much; and then, with a trembling and uncertain gait, advanced,
       put forth her hand with a wild unstudied grace, and said in a tone of sensibility: "How often
       have we all wished to see and to thank you!"  
  This daughter of his host was of tender years; apparently she could scarcely have counted
       sixteen summers. She was delicate and fragile, but as she raised her still blushing visage to
       her father's guest, Coningsby felt that he had never beheld a countenance of such striking
       and such peculiar beauty.  
  "My only daughter, Mr. Coningsby; Edith; a Saxon name, for she is the daughter of a
       Saxon."  
  But the beauty of the countenance was not the beauty of the Saxons. It was a radiant face,
       one of those that seem as if touched in their cradle by a sunbeam, and to have retained all
       its brilliancy and suffused and mantling lustre. One marks sometimes such faces, diaphanous
       with delicate splendour, in the southern regions of France. Her eye too was the rare eye of
       Acquitaine; soft and long, with lashes drooping over the cheek, dark as her clustering
       ringlets.  
  They entered the drawing-room.  
  "Mr. Coningsby," said Millbank to his daughter, "is in this part of the world only for a
       few hours, or I am sure he would become our guest. He has, however, promised to stay with us
       now and dine."  
  "If Miss Millbank will pardon this dress," said Coningsby, bowing an apology for his
       inevitable frock and boots; the maiden raised her eyes and bent her head.  
   came somewhat suddenly into the room. She was playing with her dog, but ceased
       the moment she observed Coningsby.  
  Coningsby, who since his practice with Lady Everingham, flattered himself that he had
       advanced in small talk, and was not sorry that he had now an opportunity of proving his
       prowess, made some lively observations about pets and the breeds of lap-dogs, but he was not
       fortunate in extracting a response or exciting a repartee. He began then on the beauty of
       Millbank, which he would on no account have avoided seeing, and inquired when she had last
       heard of her brother. The young lady, apparently much distressed, was murmuring something
       about Antwerp, when the entrance of her father relieved her from her embarrassment.  
  Dinner being announced, Coningsby offered his arm to his fair companion, who took it with
       her eyes fixed on the ground.  
  "You are very fond, I see, of flowers," said Coningsby, as they moved along; and the young
       lady said, "Yes."  
   The young hostess seemed to perform her office with a certain degree of
       desperate determination. She looked at a chicken and then at Coningsby, and murmured
       something which he understood. Sometimes she informed herself of his tasted or necessities in
       more detail, by the medium of her father, whom she treated as a sort of dragoman; in this
       way: "Would not Mr. Coningsby, papa, take this or that, or do so and so?" Coningsby always
       was careful to reply in a direct manner without the agency of the interpreter; but he did not
       advance. Even a petition for the great honour of taking a glass of sherry with her only
       induced the beautiful face to bow. And yet when she had first seen him, she had addressed him
       even with emotion. What could it be? He felt less confidence in his increased power of
       conversation. Why Theresa Sydney was scarcely a year older than Miss Millbank, and though she
       did not certainly originate like Lady Everingham, he got on with her perfectly well.  
   fluently and well; on all subjects his opinions seemed to be decided, and his
       language was precise. He was really interested in what Coningsby had seen, and what he had
       felt; and this sympathy divested his manner of the disagreeable effect that accompanies a
       tone inclined to be dictatorial. More than once Coningsby observed the silent daughter
       listening with extreme attention to the conversation of himself and her father.  
  The dessert was remarkable. Millbank was very proud of his fruit. A bland expression of
       self-complacency spread over his features as he surveyed his grapes, his peaches, his
       figs.  
  "Those grapes have gained a medal," he told Coningsby. "Those two are prize peaches. I have
       not yet been so successful with my figs. These however promise, and perhaps this year I may
       be more fortunate."  
  "What would your brother and myself have given for such a dessert at Eton!" said Coningsby
       to Miss Millbank, wishing to say something, and something too that might interest her.  
  She seemed infinitely distressed, and yet this time would speak:  
  "Let me give you some." He caught by chance her glance immediately withdrawn; yet it was a
       glance not only of beauty, but of feeling and thought. She added, in a hushed and hurried
       tone, dividing very nervously some grapes: "I hardly know whether Oswald will be most pleased
       or grieved when he hears that you have been here."  
  "And why grieved?" said Coningsby.  
  "That he should not have been here to welcome you, and that your stay is for so brief a
       time. It seems so strange that after having talked of you for years, we should see you only
       for hours."  
  "I hope I may return," said Coningsby, "and that Millbank may be here to welcome me; but I
       hope I may be permitted to return even if he be not."  
   rose and left the room, so suddenly and so quickly that Coningsby could scarcely
       gain the door.  
  "Yes," said Millbank filling his glass, and pursuing some previous observations, "all that
       we want in this country is to be masters of our own industry; but Saxon industry and Norman
       manners never will agree; and some day, Mr. Coningsby, you will find that out."  
  "But what do you mean by Norman manners?" inquired Coningsby.  
   assessment, amounts to more than £50,000. 41,000 per cent. On the value in the
       reign of James I. Now I call that an instance of Saxon industry competing successfully with
       Norman manners."  
  "Exactly," said Coningsby, "but those manners are gone."  
  "From Rossendale," said Millbank, with a grim smile; "but not from England."  
  "Where do you meet them?"  
  "Meet them! In every place, at every hour; and feel them too in every transaction of
       life."  
  "I know, sir, from your son," said Coningsby, inquiringly, "that you are opposed to an
       aristocracy."  
  "No, I am not. I am for an aristocracy; but a real one, a natural one."  
  "But, sir, is not the aristocracy of England," said Coningsby, "a real one? You do not
       confound our peerage for example with the degraded patricians of the continent."  
   class of the community possesses. Distinction is the basis of aristocracy. If
       you permit only one class of the population, for example, to bear arms, they are an
       aristocracy; not one much to my taste; but still a great fact. That, however, is not the
       characteristic of the English peerage. I have yet to learn they are richer than we are,
       better informed, wiser, or more distinguished for public or private virtue. Is it not
       monstrous then that a small number of men, several of whom take the titles of Duke and Earl
       from towns in this very neighbourhood, towns which they never saw, which never heard of them,
       which they did not form, or build, or establish, I say is it not monstrous, that individuals
       so circumstanced should be invested with the highest of conceivable privileges—the privilege
       of making laws? Dukes and Earls indeed! I say there is nothing in a masquerade more
       ridiculous."  
   to the stability and permanent power of a state, and whether the peerage, as
       established in England, generally tends to that end. We must not forget in such an estimate
       the influence which, in this country, is exercised over opinion by ancient lineage."  
  "Ancient lineage!" said Mr. Millbank; "I never heard of a peer with an ancient lineage. The
       real old families of this country are to be found among the peasantry; the gentry, too, may
       lay some claim to old blood. I can point you out Saxon families in this county who can trace
       their pedigrees beyond the Conquest; I know of some Norman gentlemen whose fathers
       undoubtedly came over with the Conqueror. But a peer with an ancient lineage is to me quite a
       novelty. No, no; the thirty years of the wars of the Roses freed us from those gentlemen. I
       take it after the Battle of Tewkesbury, a Norman baron was almost as rare a being in England
       as a wolf is now."  
  "I have always understood," said Coningsby, "that our peerage was the finest in
       Europe."  
   the heralds they pay to paint their carriages. But I go to facts. When Henry
       VII. called his first parliament, there were only twenty-nine temporal peers to be found, and
       even some of them took their seats illegally, for they had been attainted. Of those
       twenty-nine not five remain, and they, as the Howards for instance, are not Norman nobility.
       We owe the English peerage to three sources: the spoliation of the church; the open and
       flagrant sale of its honours by the elder Stuarts; and the boroughmongering of our own times.
       Those are the three main sources of the existing peerage of England, and in my opinion
       disgraceful ones. But I must apologize for my frankness in thus speaking to an
       aristocrat."  
  "Oh! by no means, sir; I like discussion. your son and myself at Eton have had some
       encounters of this kind before. But if your view of the case be correct," added Coningsby,
       smiling, "you cannot at any rate accuse our present peers of Norman manners."  
   neither the right of the Normans, nor do they fulfil the duty of the Normans:
       they did not conquer the land, and they do not defend it."  
  "And where will you find your natural aristocracy?" asked Coningsby.  
  "Among those men whom a nation recognizes as the most eminent for virtue, talents, and
       property, and if you please, birth and standing in the land. They guide opinion; and
       therefore they govern. I am no leveller; I look upon an artificial equality as equally
       pernicious with a factitious aristocracy; both depressing the energies, and checking the
       enterprise of a nation. I like man to be free; really free; free in his industry as well as
       his body. What is the use of Habeas Corpus, if a man may not use his hands when he is out of
       prison?"  
  "But it appears to me you have, in a great measure, this natural aristocracy in
       England."  
   House of Commons is a more aristocratic body than the House of Lords. The fact
       is, a great peer would be a greater man now in the House of Commons than in the House of
       Lords. Nobody wants a second chamber, except a few disreputable individuals. It is a valuable
       institution for any member of it who has no distinction; neither character, talents, nor
       estate. But a peer who possesses all or any of these great qualifications, would find himself
       an immeasurably more important personage in what, by way of jest, they call the Lower
       House."  
  "Is not the revising wisdom of a senate a salutary check on the precipitation of a popular
       assembly?"  
   state of our own House of Lords. It originates nothing; it has, in fact,
       announced itself as a mere Court of Registration of the decrees of your House of Commons; and
       if by any chance it ventures to alter some miserable detail in a clause of a bill that
       excites public interest, what a clatter through the country, at conservative banquets, got up
       by the rural attorneys, about the power, authority, and independence of the House of Lords;
       nine times nine, and one cheer more! No, sir, you may make aristocracies by laws; you can
       only maintain them by manners. The manners of England preserve it from its laws. And they
       have substituted for our formal aristocracy an essential aristocracy; the government of those
       who are distinguished by their fellow-citizens."  
  "But then it would appear," said Coningsby, "that the remedial action of our manners has
       removed all the political and social evils of which you complain?"  
   still exist; and must exist yet, I fear, for a very long time. The growth of our
       civilization has ever been as slow as our oaks; but this tardy development is preferable to
       the temporary expansion of the gourd."  
  "The future seems to me sometimes a dark cloud."  
   to see you at Millbank; very happy to make your acquaintance," he continued with
       some emotion, "and not merely because you are my son's friend and more than friend."  
   group of fair Neapolitans to a festival by the genial aid of Uwins.  
  Opposite Coningsby was a portrait, which had greatly attracted his attention during the
       whole dinner. It represented a woman extremely young and of a rare beauty. The costume was of
       that classical character prevalent in this country before the general peace; a blue ribband
       bound together as a fillet her clustering chestnut curls. The face was looking out of the
       canvass, and Coningsby never raised his eyes without catching its glance of blended vivacity
       and tenderness.  
  There are moments when our sensibility is affected by circumstances of a very trivial
       character. It seems a fantastic emotion, but the gaze of this picture disturbed the serenity
       of Coningsby. He endeavoured sometimes to avoid looking at it, but it irresistibly attracted
       him. More than once during the dinner he longed to inquire whom it represented; but it is a
       delicate subject to ask questions about portraits, and he refrained. Still when he was rising
       to leave the room, the impulse was irresistible. He said to Mr. Millbank, "By whom is that
       portrait, sir?"  
  The countenance of millbank became disturbed; it was not an expression of tender
       reminiscence that fell upon his features. On the contrary, the expression was agitated,
       almost angry.  
  "Oh! that is by a country artist," he said, "of whom you never heard," and moved away.  
  They found Miss Millbank in the drawing-room. She was sitting at a round table covered with
       working materials, apparently dressing a doll.  
  "Nay," thought Coningsby, "she must be too old for that!"  
  He addressed her and seated himself by her side. There were several dolls on the table, but
       he discovered, on examination, that they were pincushions; and elicited with some difficulty,
       that they were making for a fancy fair about to be held in aid of that excellent Institution,
       the Manchester Athenæum. Then the father came up and said:  
  "My child, let us have some tea," and she rose, and seated herself at the tea-table.
       Coningsby also quitted his seat, and surveyed the apartment.  
  There were several musical instruments; among others he observed a guitar; not such an
       instrument as one buys in a music-shop, but such an one as tinkles at Seville; a genuine
       Spanish guitar. Coningsby repaired to the tea-table.  
  "I am glad that you are fond of music, Miss Millbank?"  
  A blush and a bow.  
  "I hope after tea you will be so kind as to touch the guitar."  
  Signals of great distress.  
  "Were you ever at Birmingham?"  
  "Yes!" a sigh.  
  "What a splendid music hall! They should build one at Manchester."  
  "They ought," in a whisper.  
   been entered some years back. He rather regretted it now; but the thing was
       done. Coningsby, remembering the promise of the guitar, turned round to claim its fulfilment,
       but the singer had made her escape. Time elapsed, and no Miss Millbank re-appeared. Coningsby
       looked at his watch; he had to go three miles to the train, which started, as his friend of
       the previous night would phrase it, at 9-45.  
  "I should be happy if you remained with us," said Mr. Millbank; "but as you say it is out
       of your power, in this age of punctual travelling, a host is bound to speed the parting
       guest. The carriage is ready for you."  
  "Farewell then, sir. You must make my adieux to Miss Millbank, and accept my thanks for
       your great kindness."  
  "Farewell, Mr. Coningsby," said his host, taking his hand, which he retained for a moment
       as if he would say more. Then leaving it, he repeated with a somewhat wandering air, and in a
       voice of emotion, "Farewell—farewell, Mr. Coningsby."  
  
  CHAPTER V.  
   already seriously damaged the career of their leader, to whom in public they
       pretended to be devoted, began weaving again their old intrigues about the court, and not
       without effect.  
   into a corner, and advised, as friends, the representatives of boroughs to look
       sharply after the next registration.  
  Lord Monmouth, who was never greater than in adversity, and whose favourite excitement was
       to aim at the impossible, had never been more resolved on a Dukedom, than when the Reform Act
       deprived him of the twelve votes, which he had accumulated to attain that object. While all
       his companions in discomfiture were bewailing their irretrievable overthrow, Lord Monmouth
       became almost a convert to the measure, which had furnished his devising and daring mind,
       palled with prosperity, and satiated with a life of success, with an object, and the
       stimulating enjoyment of a difficulty.  
   it had hitherto sent up to Westminster a radical shopkeeper, one Mr. Jawster
       Sharp, who had taken what is called "a leading part" in the town on every "crisis" that had
       occurred since 1830; one of those zealous patriots who had got up penny subscriptions for
       gold cups to Lord Grey; cries for the bill, the whole bill, and nothing but the bill; and
       public dinners where the victual was devoured before grace was said; a worthy who makes
       speeches, passes resolutions, votes addresses, goes up with deputations, has at all times the
       necessary quantity of confidence in the necessary individual; confidence in Lord Grey;
       confidence in Lord Durham; confidence in Lord Melbourne; and can also, if necessary, give
       three cheers for the King or three groans for the Queen.  
   vigour, that the proprietors of the Liberal journal almost felt the necessity of
       getting some eminent hand down from town to compete with them. It was impossible that they
       could emanate from the rival Editor. They knew well the length of their brother's tether. Had
       they been more versant in the periodical literature of the day, they might in this "slahing"
       style have caught perhaps a glimpse of the future candidate for their borough, the Right
       Honourable Nicholas Rigby.  
   general election he was too shrewd a practiser in the political world to be
       deceived as to the ultimate result. Lord Eskdale, in whose judgment he had more confidence
       than in that of any individual, had told him from the first that the pear was not ripe;
       Rigby, who always hedged against his interest by the fulfilment of his prophecy of
       irremediable discomfiture, was never very sanguine. Indeed the whole affair was always
       considered premature by the good judges; and a long time elapsed before Tadpole and Taper
       recovered their secret influence, or re-assumed their ostentatious loquacity or their silent
       insolence.  
   the reliance in his unerring powers of calculation, and his intrepid pluck.
       Notwithstanding Schedule A, the prestige of his power had not sensibly diminished, for his
       essential resources were vast, and his intellect always made the most of his influence.  
   with so much dignity and dismissed with so much grace. Nobody would believe a
       word of the stories against him. Had he lived all his life at Coningsby, fulfilled every duty
       of a great English nobleman, benefited the county, loaded the inhabitants with favours, he
       would not have been half so popular as he found himself within a fortnight of his arrival
       with the worst county reputation conceivable, and every little squire vowing that he would
       not even leave his name at the castle to show his respect.  
   manner and the splendour of wealth. His experience proved the soundness of his
       philosophy.  
  Lord Monmouth worshipped gold, though, if necessary, he could squander it like a caliph. He
       had even a respect for very rich men; it was his only weakness, the only exception to his
       general scorn for his species. Wit, power, particular friendships, general popularity, public
       opinion, beauty, genius, virtue, all these are to be purchased; but it does not follow that
       you can buy a rich man: you may not be able or willing to spare enough. A person or a thing
       that you perhaps could not buy, became invested in the eyes of Lord Monmonth with a kind of
       halo amounting almost to sanctity.  
   of the Conservative Association and the Vice-President exchanged glances, which
       would have become Tadpole and Taper; the four attorneys knibbed their pens with increased
       energy, and vowed that nothing could withstand the influence of the aristocracy "in the long
       run." Allwent and dined at the castle; all returned home overpowered by the condescension of
       the host, the beauty of the ladies, several real Princesses, the splendour of his liveries,
       the variety of his viands, and the flavour of his wines. It was agreed that at future
       meetings of the Conservative Association, they should always give "Lord Monmouth and the
       House of Lords!"—superseding the Duke of Wellington, who was to figure in an after toast with
       the Battle of Waterloo.  
   but compensating in some degree for these deficiencies of external taste and
       beauty by the splendour and accommodation of its interior, and which a Gothic castle raised
       according to the strict rules of art could scarcely have afforded. The declining sun threw
       over the pile a rich colour as Coningsby approached it, and lit up with fleeting and fanciful
       tints the delicate foliage, of the rare shrubs and tall thin trees that clothed the acclivity
       on which it stood. Our young friend felt a little embarrassed when, without a a servant and
       in a hack chaise, he drew up to the grand portal, and a crowd of retainers came forth to
       receive him. A superior servant inquired his name with a stately composure, that disdained to
       be supercilious. It was not without some degree of pride and satisfaction that the guest
       replied, "Mr. Coningsby." The instantaneous effect was magical. It seemed to Coningsby that
       he was borne on the shoulders of the people to his apartment; each tried to carry some part
       of his luggage; and he only hoped his welcome from their superiors might be as hearty.  
  
  CHAPTER VI.  
   seemed an overwhelming affair. The sight of the servants bewildered him; how
       then was he to encounter their masters?  
  That however he must do in a moment. A groom of the chambers indicates the way to him, as
       he proceeds with a hesitating yet hurried step through several ante-chambers and
       drawing-rooms; then doors are suddenly thrown open, and he is ushered into the largest and
       most sumptuous saloon that he had ever entered. It was full of ladies and gentlemen.
       Coningsby for the first time in his life was at a great party. His immediate emotion was to
       sink into the earth, but perceiving that no one even noticed him, and that not an eye had
       been attracted to his entrance, he regained his breath and in some degree his composure, and
       standing aside, endeavoured to make himself as well as he could master of the land.  
   our young friend, by an inevitable association of ideas, to remember that,
       unknown and unnoticed as he might be, he was the only Coningsby in that proud Castle, except
       the Lord of the castle himself; and he began to be rather ashamed of permitting a sense of
       his inexperience in the mere forms and fashions of society so to oppress him, and deprive him
       as it were of the spirit and carriage which became alike his character and his position.
       Emboldened and greatly restored to himself, Coningsby advanced into the body of the
       saloon.  
   consummate bearing. He looked indeed the chieftain of a house of whom a cadet
       might be proud.  
   grandfather? To announce himself as Coningsby, as his Lordship's grandson,
       seemed somewhat ridiculous. To address his grandfather as Lord Monmouth would serve no
       purpose; to style Lord Monmouth "grandfather," would make every one laugh and seemed stiff
       and unnatural. What was he to do? To fall into an attitude, and exclaim, "Behold your
       grandchild!" or "Have you forgot your Harry?"  
  Even to catch Lord Monmouth's glance was not a very easy affair; he was much engaged on one
       side by the great lady; on the other were several gentlemen who occasionally joined in the
       conversation. But something must be done.  
   Duchess who was a fine judge of character, and who greatly regarded Coningsby,
       often mentioned this trait as one which, combined with his great abilities and acquirements
       so unusual at his age, rendered him so very interesting. In the present instance it so
       happened, that while Coningsby was watching his grandfather, he observed a gentleman advance,
       make his bow, say and receive a few words, and retire. This little incident however made a
       momentary diversion in the immediate circle of Lord Monmouth, and before they could all
       resume their former talk and fall into their previous positions, an impulse sent forth
       Coningsby, who walked up to Lord Monmouth, and standing before him, said:  
  "How do you do, grandpapa?"  
   world. And this was his child; the only one of his blood to whom he had been
       kind. It would be exaggeration to say that Lord Monmouth's heart was touched; but his
       good-nature effervesced, and his fine taste was deeply gratified. He perceived in an instant
       such a relation might be a valuable adherent; an irresistible candidate for future elections;
       a brilliant tool to work out the Dukedom. All these impressions and ideas, and many more,
       passed through the quick brain of Lord Monmouth ere the sound of Coningsby's words had seemed
       to cease, and long before the surrounding guests had recovered from the surprise which they
       had occasioned them; and which did not diminish when Lord Monmouth advancing placed his arms
       round Coningsby with a dignity of affection that would have become Louis XIV, and then in the
       high manner of the old Court kissed him on each cheek.  
  "Welcome to your home," said Lord Monmouth. "You have grown a great deal."  
   and an Ambassadress, and then placing his arm gracefully in that of his grandson
       he led him across the room, and presented him in due form to some royal blood that was his
       guest in the shape of a Russian Archduke. His Imperial Highness received our hero as
       graciously as the grandson of Lord Monmouth might expect; but no greeting can be imagined
       warmer than the one he received from the lady with whom the Archduke was conversing. She was
       a dame whose beauty was mature, but still radiant. Her figure was superb; her dark hair
       crowned with a tiara of curious workmanship. Her rounded arm was covered with costly
       bracelets, but not a jewel on her finelyformed bust, and the least possible rouge on her
       still oval cheek. Madame Colonna retained her charms.  
   sometimes softens immorality into indiscretion.  
  Lord and Lady Gaverstock were also there, who never said an unkind thing of anybody; her
       ladyship was pure as snow; but her mother having been divorced, she ever fancied she was
       paying a kind of homage to her parent by visiting those who might be some day in the same
       predicament. There were other lords and ladies of high degree; and some who, though neither
       lords and ladies, were charming people, which Lord Monmouth chiefly cared about; troops of
       fine gentlemen who came and went; and some who were neither fine, nor gentlemen, but who were
       very amusing or very obliging as circumstances required, and made life easy and pleasant to
       others and themselves.  
  A new scene this for Coningsby, who watched with interest all that passed before him. The
       dinner was announced as served; an affectionate arm guides him at a moment of some
       perplexity.  
   Rigby, who spoke as if he had seen Coningsby for the first time; but who indeed
       had, with that eye which nothing could escape, observed his reception by his grandfather,
       marked it well, and inwardly digested it.  
  
  CHAPTER VII.  
   tempt her, although she was unable to refuse her heart to one whom she deemed
       worthy of possessing it. She found her fate in an Englishman, who was the father of her only
       child, a daughter. She thought she had met in him a hero, a demi-god, a being of deep passion
       and original and creative mind; but he was only a voluptuary, full of violence instead of
       feeling, and eccentric because he had great means with which he could gratify extravagant
       whims. Stella found she had made the great and irretrievable mistake. She had exchanged
       devotion for a passionate and evanescent fancy, prompted at first by vanity, and daily
       dissipating under the influence of custom and new objects. Though not stainless in conduct,
       Stella was pure in spirit. She required that devotion which she had yielded; and she
       separated herself from the being to whom she had made the most precious sacrifice. He offered
       her the consoling compensation of a settlement which she refused; and she returned with a
       broken spirit to that profession of which she was still the ornament and the pride.  
  The animating principle of her career was her daughter, whom she educated with a solicitude
       which the most virtuous mother could not surpass. To preserve her from the stage, and to
       secure for her an independence, were the objects of the mother's life; but nature whispered
       to her, that the days of that life were already numbered. The exertions of her profession had
       alarmingly developed an inherent tendency to pulmonary disease. Anxious that her child should
       not be left without some protector, Stella yielded to the repeated solicitations of one who
       from the first had been her silent admirer, and she married Villebecque, a clever actor, and
       an enterprising man who meant to be something more. Their union was not of long duration,
       though it was happy on the side of Villebecque, and serene on that of his wife. Stella was
       recalled from this world, where she had known much triumph and more suffering; and where she
       had exercised many virtues, which elsewhere, though not here, may perhaps be accepted as some
       palliation of one great error.  
  Villebecque acted becomingly to the young charge which Stella had bequeathed to him. He was
       himself, as we have intimated, a man of enterprise, a restless spirit, not content to move
       for ever in the sphere in which he was born. Vicissitudes are the lot of such aspirants.
       Villebecque became manager of a small theatre, and made money. If Villebecque, without a
       "sous," had been a schemer, Villebecque with a small capital was the very Chevalier Law of
       theatrical managers. He took a larger theatre and even that succeeded. Soon he was recognised
       as the lessee of more than one, and still he prospered. Villebecque began to dabble in Opera
       houses. He enthroned himself at Paris; his envoys were heard of at Milan and Naples, at
       Berlin and St. Petersburg. His controversies with the "Conservatoire" at Paris, ranked among
       state papers. Villebecque rolled in chariots and drove cabs; Villebecque gave refined suppers
       to great nobles, who were honoured by the invitation; Villebecque wore a red riband in the
       button-hole of his frock, and more than one cross in his gala dress.  
  All this time the daughter of Stella increased in years and stature, and we must add in
       goodness: a mild soft-hearted girl, as yet with no decided character, but one who loved
       calmness and seemed little fitted for the circle in which she found herself. In that circle
       however she ever experienced kindness and consideration. No enterprise however hazardous, no
       management however complicated, no schemes however vast, ever for a moment induced
       Villebecque to forget "La Petite." If only for one breathless instant, hardly a day elapsed
       but he saw her; she was his companion in all his rapid movements, and he studied every
       comfort and convenience that could relieve her delicate frame in some degree from the
       inconvenience and exhaustion of travel. He was proud to surround her with luxury and
       refinement; to supply her with the most celebrated masters; to gratify every wish that she
       could express.  
   large theatre, not too much lighted, and with the artifices of a dramatic
       toilet, he might still be able successfully to re-assume those characters of coxcombs and
       "muscadins," in which he was once so celebrated. Luxury had perhaps a little too much
       enlarged his waist, but diet and rehearsals would set all right.  
   him, she feared she had no predisposition for the career.  
  Villebecque had now not only to fill his own parts at the theatre at which he had obtained
       an engagement, but he had also to be the instructor of his ward. It was a life of toil; an
       addition of labour and effort that need scarcely have been made to the exciting exertion of
       performance, and the dull exercise of rehearsal; but he bore it all without a murmur; with a
       self-command and a gentle perseverance which the finest temper in the world could hardly
       account for; certainly not when we remember its possessor who had to make all these exertions
       and endure all this wearisome toil, had just experienced the most shattering vicissitudes of
       fortune, and been hurled from the possession of absolute power and illimitable
       self-gratification.  
   establish him with a French company in London at some pretty theatre; Lord
       Eskdale to take a private box and to make all his friends do the same. Villebecque, who was
       as sanguine as he was good tempered, was ravished by this friendly scheme. He immediately
       believed that he should recover his great fortunes as rapidly as he had lost them. He foresaw
       in "La Petite" a genius as distinguished as that of her mother, although as yet not
       developed, and he was boundless in his expressions of gratitude to his patron. And indeed of
       all friends, a friend in need is the most delightful. Lord Eskdale had the talent of bein a
       friend in need. Perhaps it was because he knew so many worthless persons. But it often
       happens that worthless persons are merely people who are worth nothing.  
   of giving a turn to poor Villebecque, and that it might serve as a capital
       introduction to their scheme of the London company, Lord Eskdale obtained for him the
       engagement.  
  Villebecque and his little troop had now been a month at Coningsby, and had hitherto
       performed three times a week. Lord Monmouth was content; his guests much gratified; the
       company on the whole much approved of. It was indeed considering its limited numbers, a
       capital company. There was a young lady who played the old woman's parts—nothing could be
       more garrulous and venerable; and a lady of maturer years who performed the heroines, gay and
       graceful as May. Villebecque himself was a celebrity in characters of airy insolence and
       careless frolic. Their old man indeed was rather hard, but handy; could take anything either
       in the high serious or the low droll. Their sentimental lover was rather too much bewigged,
       and spoke too much to the audience, a fault rare with the French; but this hero had a vague
       idea that he was ultimately destined to run off with a Princess.  
  In this wise, affairs had gone on for a month; very well, but not too well. The
       enterprising genius of Villebecque, once more a manager, prompted him to action. He felt an
       itching desire to announce a novelty. He fancied Lord Monmouth had yawned once or twice when
       the heroine came on. Villebecque wanted to make a "coup." It was clear that "La Petite" must
       sooner or later begin. Could she find a more favourable audience, or a more fitting occasion
       than were now offered? True it was she had a great repugnance to come out; but it certainly
       seemed more to her advantage that she should make her first appearance at a private theatre
       than at a public one; supported by all the encouraging patronage of Coningsby Castle, than
       subjected to all the cynical criticism of the stalls of St. James's.  
   ever did. And the night of Coningsby's arrival at the castle was to witness in
       its private theatre the first appearance of   Mademoiselle Flora   .  
  
  CHAPTER VIII.  
   face was void of charm. Juno, in the full bloom of her immortality, could have
       presented nothing more majestic. Coningsby watched her as she swept along like a resistless
       Fate.  
  Servants now went round and presented to each of the guests a billet of the performance. It
       announced in striking characters the "début" of Mademoiselle Flora. A principal servant
       bearing branch lights, came forward and bowed to the Marquess. Lord Monmouth went immediately
       to the Archduke, and notified to his Imperial Highness that the comedy was ready. The
       Archduke offered his arm to the Ambassadress; the rest were following; Coningsby was called.
       Madame Colonna wished him to be her beau.  
  It was a very pretty theatre; had been rapidly rubbed up, and renovated here and there; the
       painting just touched; a little gilding on a cornice. There were no boxes, but the ground
       floor which gradually ascended was carpeted, and covered with arm-chairs, and the back of the
       theatre with a new and rich curtain of green velvet.  
  They are all seated; a great artist performs on the violin, accompanied by another great
       artist on the piano. The lights rise; somebody evidently crosses the stage behind the
       curtain. They are disposing the scene. In a moment the curtain will rise also.  
  "Have you seen Lucretia?" said the Princess to Coningsby. "She is so anxious to resume her
       acquaintance with you."  
  But before he could answer the bell rang, and the curtain rose.  
   approbation. Her agitation is extreme; she curtseys, and bows her head, as if to
       hide her face. The face was pleasing, and pretty enough; soft and engaging. Her figure slight
       and graceful. Nothing could be more perfect than her costume; purely white, but the fashion
       consummate; a single rose her only ornament. All admitted that her hair was arranged to
       admiration.  
  At length she spoke; her voice trembled, but she had a good elocution though her organ
       wanted force. The gentlemen looked at each other, and nodded approbation. There was something
       so unobstrusive in her mien, that she instantly became a favourite with the ladies. The scene
       was not long, but it was triumphant.  
   of youth. His dress too was admirable. He had studied the most distinguished of
       his audience for the occasion, and had outdone them all. The fact is, he had been assisted a
       little by a great connoisseur, a celebrated French nobleman, Count D—y, who had been one of
       the guests. The thing was perfect, and Lord Monmouth took a pinch of snuff, and tapped
       approbation on the top of his box.  
   of her tones thrilled from the heart: suddenly she clasped her hands with all
       the exhaustion of woe; an expression of agony flitted over her countenance; and she burst
       into tears. Villebecque rushed forward, and carried rather than led her from the stage; the
       audience looking at each other, some of them suspecting that this movement was a part of the
       scene.  
  "She has talent," said Lord Monmouth to the Russian ambassadress, "but wants practice.
       Villebecque should send her for a time to the provinces."  
  At length M. Villebecque came forward to express his deep regret that the sudden and severe
       indisposition of Mlle. Flora rendered it impossible for the company to proceed with the
       piece; but that the curtain would descend to rise again for the second and last piece
       announced.  
   figured in male attire; and in air, fashion, and youth, beat Villebecque out of
       the field. She looked younger than Coningsby when he went up to his grand-papa.  
  The comedy was over, the curtain fell, the audience much amused chattered brilliant
       criticism, and quitted the theatre to repair to the saloon where they were to be diverted
       to-night with Russian dances. Nobody thought of the unhappy Flora; not a single message to
       console her in her grief, to compliment her on what she had done, to encourage her future.
       And yet it was a season for a word of kindness; so at least thought one of the audience, as
       he lingered behind the hurrying crowd absorbed in their coming amusements.  
   leave a young girl who had been labouring for their amusement and who was
       suffering for her trial.  
  He got on the stage, ran behind the scenes, and asked for Mlle. Flora. They pointed to a
       door; he requested permission to enter. Flora was sitting at a table with her face resting on
       her hands. Villebecque was there, resting on the edge of the tall fender, and still in the
       dress in which he had performed in the last piece.  
  "I took the liberty," said Coningsby, "of inquiring after Mlle. Flora;" and then advancing
       to her, who had raised her head, he added: "I am sure my grandfather must feel much indebted
       to you, Mademoiselle, for making such exertions when you were suffering under so much
       indisposition."  
  "This is very amiable of you, sir," said the young lady, looking at him with
       earnestness.  
  "Mademoiselle has too much sensibility," said Villebecque, making an observation by way of
       diversion.  
   look forward—with great interest to the next occasion on which you will favour
       us."  
  "Never!" said La Petite in a plaintive tone; "oh, I hope, never!"  
  "Mademoiselle is not aware at this moment," said Coningsby, "how much her talent is
       appreciated. I assure you, sir," he added, turning to Villebecque, "I heard but one opinion,
       but one expression of gratification at her feeling and her fine taste."  
  "The talent is hereditary," said Villebecque.  
  "Indeed you have reason to say so," said Coningsby.  
  "Pardon; I was not thinking of myself. My child reminded me so much of another this
       evening. But that is nothing. I am glad you are here, sir, to re-assure Mademoiselle."  
  "I came only to congratulate her, and to lament, for our sakes as well as her own, her
       indisposition."  
  "It is not indisposition," said La Petite in a tone, with her eyes fixed on the table.  
   incidental to a first appearance," said Villebecque.  
  "A last appearance," said La Petite; "yes, it must be the last." She rose gently, she
       approached Villebecque, she laid her head on his breast, and placed her arms round his neck,
       "My father, my best father, yes, say it is the last!"  
  "You are the mistress of your lot, Flora," said Villebecque; "but with such a distinguished
       talent—"  
  "No, no, no: no talent. You are wrong, my father. I know myself. I am not of those to whom
       nature gives talents. I am born only for still life. I have no taste except for privacy. The
       convent is more suited to me than the stage."  
  "But you hear what this gentleman says," said Villebecque returning her embrace. "He tells
       you that his grandfather—my Lord Marquess I believe, sir,—that every one—that—  
   soothe the soul that he knew was suffering. Thank him, my father, thank him for
       me and before me, and promise in his presence that the stage and your daughter have parted
       for ever."  
  "Nay, Mademoiselle," said Coningsby advancing and venturing to take her hand, a soft hand,
       "make no such resolutions to-night. M. Villebecque can have no other thought or object but
       your happiness: and believe me 'tis not I only, but all, who appreciate, and if they were
       here, must respect you."  
  "I prefer respect to admiration," said Flora; "but I fear that respect is not the appanage
       of such as I am."  
  "All must respect those who respect themselves," said Coningsby. "Adieu, Mademoiselle; I
       trust to-morrow to hear that you are yourself." He bowed to Villebecque and retired.  
  In the mean time, affairs in the drawing-room assumed a very different character to those
       behind the scenes. Coningsby returned to brilliancy, groups apparently gushing with
       lightheartedness, universal content, and Russian dances!  
  "And you too, do you dance the Russian dances, Mr. Coningsby?" said Madame Colonna.  
  "I cannot dance at all," said Coningsby, beginning a little to lose his pride in the want
       of an accomplishment which at Eton he had thought it spirited to despise.  
  "Ah! you cannot dance the Russian dances! Lucretia shall teach you," said the Princess;
       "nothing will please her so much."  
  On the present occasion the ladies were not as experienced in the entertainment as the
       gentlemen; but there was amusement in being instructed. To be disciplined by an Archduke or a
       Russian Princess was all very well; but what even the good-tempered Lady Gaythorpe could not
       pardon was, that a certain Mrs. Guy Flouncey, whom they were all of them trying to put down,
       and keep down, on this, as almost on every other occasion, proved herself a more finished
       performer than even the Russians themselves.  
   Mr. Guy Flouncey was a man of good estate, a sportsman, proud of his pretty
       wife. Mrs. Guy Flouncey was even very pretty, dressed in a style of ultra fashion. However,
       she could sing, dance, act, ride, and talk, and all well; and was mistress of the art of
       flirtation. She had amused the Marquess abroad, and had taken care to call at Monmouth House,
       the instant the Morning Post apprised her he had arrived in England; the consequence was an
       invitation to Coningsby. She came with a wardrobe which, in point of variety, fancy and
       fashion, never was surpassed. Morning and evening, every day a new dress equally striking;
       and a riding-habit that was the talk and wonder of the whole neighbourhood. Mrs. Guy Flouncey
       created far more sensation in the borough when she rode down the High Street, than what the
       good people called the real Princesses.  
   Mrs. Guy Flouncey was invariably excluded; and if ever the Princess Colonna,
       impelled partly by her good nature, and partly from having known her on the continent, did
       kindly sit by her, Lady St. Julians, or some dame equally benevolent, was sure by an adroit
       appeal to her Highness on some point which could not be decided without moving, to withdraw
       her from her pretty and persecuted companion.  
   what with some gentle glozing and some gay gossip, sugar for their tongues and
       salt for their tails, she contrived pretty well to catch them all.  
  
  CHAPTER IX.  
   paint, new gilding; battalions of odd French chairs, squadrons of queer English
       tables; and large tasteless lamps and tawdry chandeliers, evidently true cockneys, and only
       taking the air by way of change. There was too throughout the drawing-rooms an absence of all
       those minor articles of ornamental furniture that are the offering of taste to the home we
       love. There were no books neither; no flowers; no pet animals; no portfolios of fine drawings
       by our English artists like the album of the Duchess, full of sketches by Landseer and
       Standfield, and their gifted brethren; not a print even, except portfolios of H. B's
       caricatures. The modes and manners of the house were not rural; there was nothing of the
       sweet order of a country life. Nobody came down to breakfast; the ladies were scarcely seen
       until dinner time; they rolled about in carriages together late in the afternoon as if they
       were in London, or led a sort of factitious boudoir life in their provincial
       dressing-rooms.  
   here with whom you may try your wing a little; don't talk to any of them too
       much. Be very careful of intimacies. All the people here are good acquaintance; at least
       pretty well. Now, here," said the Marquess, taking up a letter and then throwing it on the
       table again, "now here is a man whom I should like you to know, Sidonia. He will be here in a
       few days. Lay yourself out for him if you have the opportunity. He is a man of rare capacity,
       and enormously rich. No one knows the world like Sidonia. I never met his equal; and 'tis so
       pleasant to talk with one that can want nothing of you."  
   entirely taken up with the Archduke, whom he was accompanying all over the
       neighbourhood, in visits to manufactures, many of which Rigby himself saw for the first time,
       but all of which he fluently explained to his Imperial Highness. In return for this, he
       extracted much information from the Archduke on Russian plans and projects, materials for a
       "slashing" article against the Russophobia that he was preparing, and in which he was to
       prove that Muscovite aggression was an English interest, and entirely to be explained by the
       want of sea-coast, which drove the Czar, for the pure purposes of commerce, to the Baltic and
       the Euxine.  
   be detected, was not in the least altered since she first so cordially saluted
       Coningsby, as her dear young friend at Monmouth House.  
  The day was delightful, the park extensive and picturesque, the Ambassadress sparkling with
       anecdote, and occasionally, in a low voice, breathing a diplomatic hint to Lord Monmouth, who
       bowed his graceful consciousness of her distinguished confidence. Coningsby occasionally took
       advantage of one of those moments, when the conversation ceased to be general, to address
       Lucretia, who replied in calm, fine, smiles, and in affable monosyllables. She indeed
       generally succeeded in conveying an impression to those she addressed, that she had never
       seen them before, did not care to see them now, and never wished to see them again. And all
       this too with an air of great courtesy.  
  They arrived at the brink of a wooded bank; at their feet flowed a very fine river, deep
       and rushing, though not broad; its opposite bank the boundary of a richly timbered park.  
   "And is that yours, Lord Monmouth?"  
  "Not yet," said the Marquess. "That is Hellingsley; it is one of the finest places in the
       county, with a splendid estate; not so considerable as Coningsby, but very great. It belongs
       to an old, a very old man, without a relative in the world. It is known that the estate will
       be sold at his death, which may be almost daily expected. Then it is mine. No one can offer
       for it what I can afford. For it gives me this division of the county, Princess. To possess
       Hellingsley is one of my objects." The Marquess spoke with an animation unusual with him,
       almost with a degree of excitement.  
  The wind met them as they returned, the breeze blew rather freshly. Lucretia all of a
       sudden seemed touched with unusual emotion. She was alarmed lest Lord Monmouth should catch
       cold; she took a kerchief from her own well-turned throat to tie round his neck. He feebly
       resisted, evidently much pleased.  
   distinguished guests, but instantly yielding to the request of Lord Monmouth,
       she sang. It was impossible to conceive a contralto of more thrilling power, or an execution
       more worthy of the voice. Coningsby, who was not experienced in fine singing, listened as if
       to a supernatural lay, but all agreed it was of the highest class of nature and of art; and
       the Archduke was in raptures. Lucretia received even his Highness's compliments with a
       graceful indifference. Indeed to those who watched her demeanour, it might be remarked that
       she seemed to yield to none, although all bowed before her.  
  Madame Colonna, who was always extremely kind to Coningsby, expressed to him her
       gratification from the party of the morning. It must have been delightful, she assured
       Coningsby, for Lord Monmouth to have had both Lucretia and his grandson with him; and
       Lucretia too, she added, must have been so pleased.  
   his existence, looked forward with such gratification to his society,
       remembered with so much pleasure the past, anticipated so much happiness from the future. It
       appeared to him that he was to Lucretia, if not an object of repugnance, as he sometimes
       fancied, certainly one only of absolute indifference; but he said nothing. He had already
       lived long enough to know that it is unwise to wish every thing explained.  
   that she liked him almost as much as Lucretia did; the Russians persisted in
       always styling him "the young Marquess," notwithstanding the Ambassador's explanations; Mrs.
       Guy Flouncey made a dashing attack on him; but Coningsby remembered a lesson which Lady
       Everingham had graciously bestowed on him. He was not to be caught again easily. Besides Mrs.
       Guy Flouncey laughed a little too much, and talked a little too loud.  
   women. To be sure his station was eminent; he was noble, and very rich, and
       very powerful, and these are qualities which tell as much with the softer as the harsher
       sex;—but there are individuals with all these qualities who are nevertheless unpopular with
       women. Lord Eskdals was easy, knew the world thoroughly, had no prejudices, and above all,
       had a reputation for success. A reputation for success has as much influence with women, as a
       reputation for wealth has with men. Both reputations may be, and often are, unjust; but we
       see persons daily make good fortunes by them all the same. Lord Eskdale was not an impostor;
       and though he might not have been so successful a man had he not been Lord Eskdale, still
       thrown over by a revolution, he would have lighted on his legs.  
   contributed to the happiness of poor Flora. True it was, in the evening she
       often found herself sitting or standing alone and no one noticing her; she had no dazzling
       quality to attract men of fashion, who themselves love to wordship ever the fashionable. Even
       their goddesses must be "à la mode." But Coningsby never omitted an opportunity to show Flora
       some kindness under these circumstances. He always came and talked to her, and praised her
       singing, and would sometimes hand her refreshments and give her his arm if necessary. These
       slight attentions coming from the grandson of Lord Monmouth were for the world redoubled in
       their value; though Flora thought only of their essential kindness; all in character with
       that first visit which dwelt on the poor girl's memory, though it had long ago escaped that
       of her visitor. For in truth Coningsby had no other impulse for his conduct but
       kind-heartedness.  
   the infinite disgust of Lady St. Julians who had a daughter with her,
       successfully entrapped the devoted attentions of the young Marquess of Beaumanoir, who was
       never very backward if a lady would take trouble enough; while his friend Mr. Melton, whose
       barren homage Lady St. Julians wished her daughter ever particularly to shun, employed all
       his gaiety, good humour, frivolity and fashion, in amusing that young lady, and with
       irresistible effect. For the rest, they continued, though they had only partridges to shoot,
       to pass the morning without weariness. The weather was fine; the stud numerous; all might be
       mounted. The Archduke and his suite, guided by Mr. Rigby, had always some objects to visit,
       and railroads returned them just in time for the banquet with an appetite which they had
       earned, and during which Rigby recounted their achievements, and his own opinions.  
   which is the spell of a country-house. Lord Monmouth was satisfied for he had
       scarcely ever felt wearied. All that he required in life was to be amused; perhaps that was
       not all he required, but it was indispensable. Nor was it wonderful that on the present
       occasion he obtained his purpose, for there were half a hundred of the brightest eyes and
       quickest brains ever on the watch or the whirl, to secure him distraction. The only
       circumstance that annoyed him was the non-arrival of Sidonia. Lord Monmouth could not bear to
       be disappinted. He could not refrain from saying notwithstanding all the resources and all
       the exertions of his guests:  
  "I cannot understand why Sidonia does not come. I wish Sidonia were here."  
  "So do I," said Lord Eskdale, "Sidonia is the only man who tells one anything new."  
  "We saw Sidonia at Lord Studcaster's," said the Marquess of Beaumanoir. "He told Melton he
       was coming here."  
  "You know he has bought all Studcaster's horses," said Mr. Melton.  
  "I wonder he does not buy Studcaster himself," said Lord Monmouth, "I would if I were he;
       Sidonia can buy anything," he turned to Mrs. Guy Flouncey.  
  "I wonder who Sidonia is," thought Mrs. Guy Flouncey, but she was determined no one should
       suppose she did not know.  
  At length one day Coningsby met Madame Colonna in the vestibule before dinner.  
  "Milor is in such good temper, Mr. Coningsby," she said; "Monsieur de Sidonia has
       arrived."  
   the room, and caught the countenance of his companion in the forest inn; he who
       announced to him, that "the Age of Ruins was past."  
  
  CHAPTER X.  
  Sidonia was descended from a very ancient and noble family of Arragon, that, in
       the course of ages, had given to the state many distinguished citizens. In the priesthood its
       members had been peculiarly eminent. Besides several prelates, they counted among their
       number an Archbishop of Toledo; and a Sidonia, in a season of great danger and difficulty,
       had exercised for a series of years the paramount office of Grand Inquisitor.  
   in common with two-thirds of the Arragonese nobility, secretly adhered to the
       ancient faith and ceremonies of their fathers—a belief in the unity of the God of Sinai, and
       the rites and observances of the laws of Moses.  
   votary of Mahomet. Both alike built palaces, gardens and fountains; filled
       equally the highest offices of the state, competed in an extensive and enlightened commerce,
       and rivalled each other in renowned universities.  
   the Institution that had exterminated the Albligenses and had desolated
       Languedoc, and which it should ever be remembered was established in the Spanish kingdoms
       against the protests of the Cortes and amid the terror of the populace. The Dominicans opened
       their first tribunal at Seville, and it is curious that the first individuals they summoned
       before them were the Duke of Medina Sidonia, the Marquess of Cadiz, and the Count of Arcos;
       three of the most considerable personages in Spain. How many were burned alive at Seville
       during the first year, how many imprisoned for life, what countless thousands were visited
       with severe though lighter punishments, need not be recorded here. In nothing was the Holy
       Office more happy than in multiform and subtle means by which they tested the sincerity of
       the New Christians.  
   chief Inquisitor was assassinated in the Cathedral of Saragossa. Alas! it was
       fated that in this, one of the many, and continual, and continuing struggles between the
       rival organizations of the North and the South, the children of the sun should fall. The
       fagot and the San Benito were the doom of the nobles of Arragon. Those who were convicted of
       secret Judaism, and this scarcely three centuries ago, were dragged to the stake; the sons of
       the noblest houses, in whose veins the Hebrew taint could be traced, had to walk in solemn
       procession singing psalms and confessing their faith in the religion of the fell
       Torquamada.  
   that summoned Medina Sidonia and Cadiz to its dark inquisition? Where is Spain?
       Its fall, its unparalleled and its irremediable fall, is mainly to be attributed to the
       expulsion of that large portion of its subjects, the most industrious and intelligent, who
       traced their origin to the Mosaic and Mahomedan Arabs.  
  The Sidonias of Arragon were Nuovos Christianos. Some of them no doubt were burned alive at
       the end of the fifteenth century under the system of Torquamada, many of them doubtless wore
       the San Benito; but they kept their titles and estates; and in time reached those great
       offices to which we have referred.  
   national resources, this Sidonia, feeling that Madrid, or even Cadiz, could
       never be a base on which the monetary transactions of the world could be regulated, resolved
       to emigrate to England, with which he had in the course of years formed considerable
       commercial connections. He arrived here after the peace of Paris with his large capital. He
       staked all that he was worth on the Waterloo loan; and the event made him one of the greatest
       capitalists in Europe.  
  No sooner was Sidonia established in England, than he professed Judaism; which Torquamada
       flattered himself, with the fagot and the San Benito, he had drained out of the veins of his
       family more than three centuries ago. He sent over also for several of his brothers who were
       as good Catholics in Spain as Ferdinand and Isabella could have possibly desired, but who
       made an offering in the synagogue, in gratitude for their safe voyage, on their arrival in
       England.  
   He reaped the due reward of his sagacity. Europe did require money, and Sidonia
       was ready to lend it to Europe. France wanted some; Austria more; Prussia a little; Russia a
       few millions. Sidonia could furnish them all. The only county which he avoided was Spain; he
       was too well acquainted with its resources. Nothing too would ever tempt him to lend anything
       to the revolted colonies of Spain. Prudence saved him from being a creditor of the mother
       country; his Spanish pride recoiled from the rebellion of her children.  
   was still in the vigor of life, and was not a mere money-making machine. He had
       a general intelligence equal to his position, and looked forward to the period when some
       relaxation from his vast enterprises and exertions might enable him to direct his energies to
       great objects of public benefit. But in the height of this vast prosperity he suddenly died,
       leaving only one child, a youth still of tender years, and heir to the greatest fortune in
       Europe, so great indeed that it could only be calculated by millions.  
   organization. The young Sidonia penetrated the highest mysteries of mathematics
       with a facility almost instinctive; while a memory, which never had any twilight hours, but
       always reflected a noontide clearness, seemed to magnify his acquisitions of ancient learning
       by the promptness with which they could be re-produced and applied.  
   had made a long visit to another of his father's relatives at Frankfort,
       possessed a complete mastery over the principal European languages.  
   bed of self-indulgence; it instils into us that indefinable tact seldom
       obtained in later life, which prevents us from saying the wrong thing, and often impels us to
       do the right.  
  Between Paris and Naples Sidonia passed two years, spent apparently in the dissipation
       which was perhaps inseparable from his time of life. He was admired by women, to whom he was
       magnificent, idolized by artists whom he patronised, received in all circles with great
       distinction, and appreciated for his intellect by the very few to whom he at all opened
       himself. For though affable and gracious, it was impossible to penetrate him. Though very
       unreserved in his manner, his frankness was strictly limited to the surface. He observed
       everything, thought ever, but avoided serious discussion. If you pressed him for an opinion,
       he took refuge in raillery, or threw out some grave paradox which it was not easy to cope
       with.  
   the disposition and management of his vast fortune, quitted Europe.  
  Sidonia was absent from his connexions for five years, during which period he never
       communicated with them. They were aware of his existence only by the orders which he drew on
       them for payment, and which frequently arrived from all quarters of the globe. It would
       appear from these documents that he had dwelt a considerable time in the Mediterranean
       regions; penetrated Nilotic Africa to Sennaar and Abyssinia; traversed the Asiatic continent
       to Tartary, whence he had visited Hindostan, and the isles of that Indian sea which are so
       little known. Afterwards he was heard of at Valparaiso, the Brazils, and Lima. He evidently
       remained some time at Mexico, which he quitted for the United States. One morning without
       notice he arrived in London.  
   to their last term, and had himself illustrated them by observation and
       experiment. He had lived in all orders of society, had viewed every combination of Nature and
       of Art, and had observed man under every phasis of civilization. He had even studied him in
       the wilderness. The influence of creeds and laws, manners, customs, traditions, in all their
       diversities, had been subjected to his personal scrutiny.  
  He brought to the study of this vast aggregate of knowledge a penetrative intellect, that
       matured by long meditation, and assisted by that absolute freedom from prejudice, which was
       the compensatory possession of a man without a country, permitted Sidonia to fathom as it
       were by intuition, the depth of questions apparently the most difficult and profound. He
       possessed the rare faculty of communicating with precision ideas the most abstruse, and in
       general a power of expression which arrests and satisfies attention.  
   tried, and which had avoided excess, Sidonia nevertheless looked upon life with
       a glance rather of curiosity than content. His religion walled him out from the pursuits of a
       citizen; his riches deprived him of the stimulating anxieties of a man. He perceived himself
       a lone being, alike without cares and without duties.  
   acts in secret; for void of all self-love, public approbation was worthless to
       him; but the individual never touched him. Woman was to him a toy, man a machine.  
  The lot the most precious to man, and which a beneficent Providence has made not the least
       common; to find in another heart a perfect and profound sympathy; to unite his existence with
       one who could share all his joys, soften all his sorrows, aid him in all his projects,
       respond to all his fancies, counsel him in his cares, and support him in his perils; make
       life charming by her charms, interesting by her intelligence, and sweet by the vigilant
       variety of her tenderness; to find you life blessed by such an influence, and to feel that
       your influence can bless such a life: this lot, the most divine of divine gifts, that power
       and even fame can never rival in its delights—all this Nature had denied to Sidonia.  
   sunbeam as often a messenger of pestilence as an angel of regenerative
       grace.  
  Such a temperament, though rare, is peculiar to the East. It inspired the founders of the
       great monarchies of antiquity, the prophets that the Desart has sent forth, the Tartar chiefs
       who have overrun the world; it might be observed in the great Corsican, who, like most of the
       inhabitants of the Mediterranean isles, had probably Arab blood in his veins. It is a
       temperament that befits conquerors and legislators, but in ordinary times and ordinary
       situations, entails on its possessor only eccentric aberrations or profound melancholy.  
   characters, in general so difficult to trace, and of gaining their devotion. To
       these sources he owed that knowledge of strange and hidden things which often startled those
       who listened to him. Nor was it easy, scarcely possible, to deceive him. Information reached
       him from so many, and such contrary quarters, that with his discrimination and experience, he
       could almost instantly distinguish the truth. The secret history of the world was his
       pastime. His great pleasure was to contrast the hidden motive, with the public pretext, of
       transactions.  
   to other facts, the only mode of obtaining truth.  
  Sidonia was well aware that in the five great varieties in which Physiology has divided the
       human species; to wit, the Caucasian, the Mongolian, the Malayan, the American, the
       Ethiopian; the Arabian tribes rank in the first and superior class, together, among others,
       with the Saxon and the Greek. This fact alone is a source of great pride and satisfaction to
       the animal Man. But Sidonia and his brethren could claim a distinction which the Saxon and
       the Greek, and the rest of the Caucasian nations, have forfeited. The Hebrew is an unmixed
       race. Doubtless among the tribes who inhabit the bosom of the Desart, progenitors alike of
       the Mosaic and the Mahomedan Arabs, blood may be found as pure as that of the descendants of
       the Scheik Abraham. But the Mosaic Arabs are the most ancient, if not the only, unmixed blood
       that dwells in cities.  
   coined by poets, blazoned by cozening heralds, but perceptible in its physical
       advantages, and in the vigour of its unsullied idiosyncracy.  
   wear away and disappear, while their victims still flourish, in all the
       primeval vigour of the pure Asian breed.  
  Shortly after his arrival in England, Sidonia repaired to the principal courts of Europe,
       that he might become personally acquainted with the monarchs and ministers of whom he had
       heard so much. His position insured him a distinguished reception; his personal qualities
       immediately made him cherished. He could please; he could do more; he could astonish. He
       could throw out a careless observation which would make the oldest diplomatist start; a
       winged word that gained him the consideration, sometimes the confidence, of Sovereigns. When
       he had fathomed the intelligence which governs Europe, and which can only be done by personal
       acquaintance, he returned to this country.  
   our circles. His immense wealth, his unrivalled social knowledge, his clear
       vigorous intellect, the severe simplicity of his manners, frank, but never claiming nor
       brooking familiarity, and his devotion to field sports, which was the safety-valve of his
       energy, were all circumstances and qualities which the English appreciate and admire; and it
       may be fairly said of Sidonia that few men were more popular, and none less understood.  
  
  CHAPTER XI.  
   bore, gave a political turn to the conversation after the ladies had left the
       room.  
  "Tadpole wants me to stand for Birmingham," said Mr. Ormsby, gravely.  
  "You!" exclaimed Lord Monmouth, and throwing himself back in his chair, he broke into a
       real, hearty laugh.  
  "Yes; the Conservatives mean to start two candidates; a manufacturer they have got, and
       they have written up to Tadpole for a "Westend man."  
  "A what?"  
  "A West-end man, who will make the ladies patronise their fancy articles."  
  "The result of the Reform Bill then," said Lucian Gay, "will be to give Manchester a
       bishop, and Birmingham a dandy."  
  "I begin to believe the result will be very different to what we expected," said Lord
       Monmouth.  
   put in a brief careless observation, which baulked his inspiration.  
  "Certainly," said Mr. Ormsby, "when the guns were firing over Vyvyan's last speech and
       confession, I never expected to be asked to stand for Birmingham."  
  "Perhaps you may be called up to the other house by the title," said Lucian Gay. "Who
       knows?"  
  "I agree with Tadpole," said Mr. Ormsby, "that if we only stick to the Registration, the
       country is saved."  
  "Fortunate country!" said Sidonia, "that can be saved by a good registration!"  
  "I believe after all that with property and pluck," said Lord Monmouth, "Parliamentary
       Reform is not such a very bad thing."  
   but why nobody knew, who had neither political abilities, nor political
       opinions, but had some floating idea that it would get himself and his wife to some more
       balls and dinners, and who was duly ticketed for "a good thing" in the candidate list of the
       Tadpoles and the Tapers, was of opinion that an immense deal might be done by properly
       patronising borough races. That was his specific how to prevent revolution.  
  Taking advantage of a pause, Lord Monmouth said, "I should like to know what you think of
       this question, Sidonia."  
  "I am scarcely a competent judge," he said as if wishing to disclaim any interference in
       the conversation, and then added, "but I have been ever of opinion that revolutions are not
       to be evaded."  
  "Exactly my views," said Mr. Rigby eagerly, "I say it now, I have said it a thousand times,
       you may doctor the registration as you like, but you can never get rid of Schedule A."  
   tell us the names of the boroughs in Schedule A?" said Sidonia.  
  "I am sure I cannot," said Lord Monmouth, "though six of them belonged to myself."  
  "But the principle," said Mr. Rigby, "they represented a principle."  
  "Nothing else certainly," said Lucian Gay.  
  "And what principle?" inquired Sidonia.  
  "The principle of nomination."  
  "That is a practice, not a principle," said Sidonia. "Is it a practice that no longer
       exists?"  
  "You think then," said Lord Eskdale cutting in before Rigby, "that the Reform Bill has done
       us no harm?"  
  "It is not the Reform Bill that has shaken the aristocracy of this country, but the means
       by which that Bill was carried," replied Sidonia.  
  "Physical force?" said Lord Eskdale.  
  "Or social power?" said Sidonia.  
   fortuitous, violently assaulted the argument, and astonished several country
       gentlemen present by his volubility. They at length listened to real eloquence. At the end of
       a long appeal to Sidonia, that gentleman only bowed his head, and said, "Perhaps;" and then
       turning to his neighbour, inquired whether birds were plentiful in Lancashire this season; so
       that Mr. Rigby was reduced to the necessity of forming the political opinions of Mr. Guy
       Flouncey.  
  As the gentlemen left the dining-room, Coningsby though at some distance was observed by
       Sidonia, who stopped instantly, then advanced to Coningsby and extending his hand, said, "I
       said we should meet again, though I hardly expected so quickly."  
  "And I hope we shall not separate so soon," said Coningsby; "I was much struck with what
       you said just now about the Reform Bill. Do you know that the more I think, the more I am
       perplexed by what is meant by Representation."  
   quitting the room with him. "People may be represented without periodical
       elections of neighbours who are incapable to maintain their interests, and strangers who are
       unwilling."  
  The entrance of the gentlemen produced the same effect on the saloon as sunrise on the
       world; universal animation, a general though gentle stir. The Archduke bowing to every one,
       devoted himself to the daughter of Lady St. Julians, who herself pinned Lord Beaumanoir
       before he could reach Mr. Guy Flouncey. Coningsby instead talked nonsense to that lady.
       Brilliant cavaliers including Mr. Melton, addressed a band of beautiful damsels grouped on a
       large ottoman. Everywhere sounded a delicious murmur, broken occasionally by a
       silver-sounding laugh not too loud. Sidonia and Lord Eskdale did not join the ladies. They
       stood for a few moments in conversation, and then threw themselves on a sofa.  
  "Who is that?" asked Sidonia of his companion rather earnestly, as Coningsby quitted
       them.  
  "'Tis the grandson of Monmouth; young Coningsby."  
  "Ah! The new generation then promises. I met him once before, by chance; he interests
       me."  
  "They tell me he is a lively lad. He is a prodigious favourite here, and I should not be
       surprised if Monmouth made him his heir."  
  "I hope he does not dream of inheritances," said Sidonia. "'Tis the most enervating of
       visions."  
  "Do you admire Lady Augustina St. Julians?" said Mrs. Guy Flouncey to Coningsby.  
  "I admire no one except yourself."  
  "Oh! how very gallant, Mr. Coningsby!"  
  "When should men be gallant, if not to the brilliant and the beautiful!" said
       Coningsby.  
  "Ah! you are laughing at me."  
  "No, I am not. I am quite grave."  
  "Your eyes laugh. Now tell me, Mr. Coningsby, Lord Henry Sydney is a very great friend of
       yours?"  
  "Very."  
  "He is very amiable?"  
  "Very."  
  "He does a great deal for the poor at Beaumanoir? A very fine place is it not?"  
  "Very."  
  "As fine as Coningsby?"  
  "At present with Mrs. Guy Flouncey at Coningsby, Beaumanoir would have no chance."  
  "Ah! you laugh at me again! Now tell me, Mr. Coningsby, what do you think we shall do
       to-night? I look upon you, you know, as the real arbiter of our destinies."  
  "You shall decide," said Coningsby.  
  "Mon cher Harry," said Madame Colonna coming up; "they wish Lucretia to sing, and she will
       not. You must ask her, she cannot refuse you."  
  "I assure you she can," said Coningsby.  
  "Mon cher Harry, your grandpapa did desire me to beg you to ask her to sing."  
  So Coningsby unwillingly approached Lucretia who was talking with the Russian
       Ambassador.  
  "I am sent upon a fruitless mission," said Coningsby looking at her, and catching her
       glance.  
  "What and why?" she replied.  
  "The mission is to entreat you to do us all a great favour; and the cause of its failure
       will be, that I am the envoy."  
  "If the favour be one to yourself, it is granted; and if you be the envoy, you need never
       fear failure with me."  
  "I must presume then to lead you away," said Coningsby bending to the Ambassador.  
  "Remember," said Lucretia as they approached the instrument, "that I am singing to
       you."  
  "It is impossible ever to forget it," said Coningsby leading her to the piano with great
       politeness, but only with great politeness.  
  "Where is Mademoiselle Flora?" she inquired.  
   countenance. "I am come to ask a favour," he said, and he named his
       request.  
  "I will sing," she replied; "but only tell me what you like."  
  Coningsby felt the difference between the courtesy of the head and of the heart, as he
       contrasted the manner of Lucretia and Flora. Nothing could be more exquisitely gracious than
       the daughter of Colonna was to-night; Flora, on the contrary, was rather agitated and
       embarrassed; and did not express her readiness with half the facility and the grace of
       Lucretia; but Flora's arm trembled as Coningsby led her to the piano.  
  Meantime Lord Eskdale and Sidonia are in deep converse.  
  "Hah! that is a fine note!" said Sidonia, and he looked round. "Who is that singing? Some
       new protégée of Lord Monmouth?"  
  "'Tis the daughter of the Colonnas," said Lord Eskdale, "the Princess Lucretia."  
  "Why, she was not at dinner to-day."  
  "No, she was not there."  
   to be found. When I was a boy, it made me almost in love even with
       Pisaroni."  
  "Well, the Princess is scarcely more lovely. 'Tis a pity the plumage is not as beautiful as
       the note. She is plain."  
  "No; not plain with that brow."  
  "Well, I rather admire her myself," said Lord Eskdale. "She has fine points."  
  "Let us approach," said Sidonia.  
  The song ceased, Lord Eskdale advanced, made his compliments, and then said, "You were not
       at dinner to-day."  
  "Why should I be?" said the Princess.  
  "For our sakes, for mine, if not for your own," said Lord Eskdale, smiling. "Your absence
       has been remarked, and felt I assure you by others as well as myself. There is my friend
       Sidonia so enraptured with your thrilling tones, that he has abruptly closed a conversation
       which I have been long counting on. Do you know him? May I present him to you?"  
   calling Sidonia, he presented his friend to the Princess.  
  "You are fond of music, Lord Eskdale tells me?" said Lucretia.  
  "When it is excellent," said Sidonia.  
  "But that is so rare," said the Princess.  
  "And precious as Paradise," said Sidonia. "As for indifferent music 'tis Purgatory; but
       when it is bad, for my part I feel myself—"  
  "Where?" said Lord Eskdale.  
  "In the last circle of the Inferno," said Sidonia.  
  Lord Eskdale turned to Flora.  
  "And in what circle do you place us who are here?" inquired the Princess of Sidonia.  
  "One too polished for his verse," replied her companion.  
  "You mean too insipid," said the Princess. "I wish that life were a little more
       Dantesque."  
  "There is not less treasure in the world," said Sidonia, "because we use paper currency;
       and there is not less passion than of old, though it is bon-ton to be tranquil."  
   and then looking round the apartment. "Have these automata indeed souls?"  
  "Some of them," said Sidonia. "As many as would have had souls in the fourteenth
       century."  
  "I thought they were wound up every day," said the Princess.  
  "Some are self-impelling," said Sidonia.  
  "And you can tell at a glance?" inquired the Princess. "You are one of those who can read
       human nature?"  
  "'Tis a book open to all."  
  "But if they cannot read?"  
  "Those must be your automata."  
  "Lord Monmouth tells me you are a great traveller."  
  "I have not discovered a new world."  
  "But you have visited it?"  
  "It is getting old."  
  "I would sooner recall the old than discover the new," said the Princess.  
  "We have both of us cause," said Sidonia. "Our names are the names of the Past."  
  "I do not love a world of Utility," said the Princess.  
  "You prefer to be celebrated to being comfortable," said Sidonia.  
  "It seems to me that the world is withering under routine."  
  " 'Tis the inevitable lot of humanity," said Sidonia. "Man must ever be the slave of
       routine; but in old days it was a routine of great thoughts, and now it is a routine of
       little ones."  
  The evening glided on; the dance succeeded the song; the ladies were fast vanishing;
       Coningsby himself was meditating a movement, when the young Marquess as he passed him said,
       "Come to Lucian Gay's room; we are going to smoke a cigar."  
   attentive and expanding intelligence of a new member of the Grumpy Club.
       Familiar as all present were with the story whose stimulus of agonizing risibility they had
       all in turn experienced, it was with extreme difficulty that any of them could resist the
       fatal explosion which was to be attended with the dreaded penalty. The Marquess looked on the
       table with desperate seriousness, an ominous pucker quivering round his lip; Mr. Melton
       crammed his handkerchief into his mouth with one hand, while he lighted the wrong end of a
       cigar with the other; one youth hung over the back of his chair pinching himself like a
       faquir, while another hid his countenance on the table.  
   had the misfortune to be graced with that appendage to which I have referred.
       His health being drunk, Sir Mowbray Cholmondeley Fetherstonehaugh rose. He was a little
       unpopular at the moment from an ugly story about killing foxes, and the guests were not as
       quiet as orators generally desire, so the Honourable Baronet prayed particular attention to a
       matter personal to himself. Instantly there was a dead silence—" but here Coningsby, who had
       moved for sometime very restlessly on his chair suddenly started up, and struggling for a
       moment against the inward convulsion but in vain, stamped against the floor and gave a
       shout.  
  "A song from Mr. Coningsby," said the president of the Grumpy Club amid an universal and
       now permissible roar of laughter.  
   pastimes more active wanting. He could dance a Tarantalla like a Lazaroni, and
       execute a Cracovienne with all the mincing graces of an Opera heroine.  
   was more Parliamentary than the original; "plus Arabe que l'Arabie."  
  The Duke was never more curt, nor Sir Robert more specious; he was as fiery as Stanley, and
       as acrid as Graham. Nor did he do their opponents less justice. Lord Palmerston himself never
       treated a profound subject with a more pleasant volatility; and when Lucian rose at an early
       hour of morn, in a full house alike exhausted and excited, and after having endured for hours
       in sarcastic silence the menacing finger of Sir Robert shaking over the green table and
       appealing to his misdeeds in the irrevocable records of Hansard, Lord John himself could not
       have afforded a more perfect representative of pluck.  
  But loud as was the laughter, and vehement the cheering with which Lucian's performances
       were received, all these ebullitions sank into insignificance compared with the reception
       which greeted what he himself announced was to be the speech of the night. Having quaffed
       full many a quaigh of toddy, he insisted on delivering it on the table, a proposition with
       which his auditors immediately closed.  
  The orator appeared, the great man of the night, who was to answer everybody on both sides.
       Ah! that harsh voice, that arrogant style, that saucy superficiality which decided on
       everything, that insolent ignorance that contradicted everybody; it was impossible to mistake
       them! And Coningsby had the pleasure of seeing reproduced before him the guardian of his
       youth, and the patron of the mimic— the Right Honourable Nicholas Rigby!  
  
  CHAPTER XII.  
   arranged by their mutual relatives, might suit very well the clime and manners
       of Italy, but Lucretia was well aware that it was altogether opposed to the habits and
       feelings of this country. She had no conviction that either Coningsby would wish to marry
       her, or if willing, that his grandfather would sanction such a step in one as yet only on the
       threshold of the world. Lucretia therefore received the suggestions and proposals of Madame
       Colonna with great coldness and indifference; one might even say contempt, for she neither
       felt respect for this lady, nor was she sedulous to evince it. Although really younger than
       Coningsby, Lucretia felt that a woman of eighteen is in all worldly considerations, ten years
       older than a youth of the same age. She anticipated that a considerable time might elapse
       before Coningsby would feel it necessary to seal his destiny by marriage, while on the other
       hand, she was not only anxious, but resolved, not to delay on her part her emancipation from
       the galling position in which she very frequently found herself.  
   and impressions. She was not naturally communicative, and conversed with no one
       with less frankness and facility than with her step-mother. Madame Colonna therefore found no
       reasons in her conversation with Lucretia to change her determination. As her mind was not
       very ingenious she did not see questions in those various lights which make us at the same
       time infirm of purpose and tolerant. What she fancied ought to be done, she fancied must be
       done; for she perceived no middle course or alternative. For the rest, Lucretia's carriage
       towards her gave her little discomfort. Besides she herself though good-natured, was
       obstinate. Her feelings were not very acute; nothing much vexed her. As long as she had fine
       dresses, good dinners, and opera boxes, she could bear her plans to be crossed like a
       philosopher; and her consolation under her unaccomplished devices was her admirable
       consistency, which always assured her that her projects were wise, though unfulfilled.  
   world were amused or amusing themselves at the comedy or in the dance, to steal
       down with some congenial sprites to the magical and illumined chamber, and use his cue until
       bedtime.  
  Faithful to her first impressions, Lucretia had made no difference in her demeanour to
       Coningsby to that which she offered to the other guests. Polite, but uncommunicative; ready
       to answer, but never originating conversation; she charmed him as little by her manner as by
       her person; and after some attempts not very painstaking to interest her, Coningsby had
       ceased to address her. The day passed by with only a faint recognition between them; even
       that sometimes omitted.  
   that he seemed generally looked upon in the light of his grandfather's heir,
       and that Lady St. Julians, more learned in that respect than any lady in the kingdom, was
       heard more than once to regret that she had not brought another daughter with her, Clara
       Isabella as well as Augustina; the Princess Lucretia began to imagine that Madame Colonna
       after all, might not be so extravagant in her purpose, as she had first supposed. She
       therefore surprised Coningsby with the almost affectionate moroseness with which, while she
       hated to sing, she yet found pleasure in singing for him alone. And it is impossible to say
       what might not have been the next move in her tactics in this respect, had not the very night
       on which she had resolved to commence the enchantment of Coningsby, introduced to her
       Sidonia.  
   From the evening of his introduction, Sidonia sought the society of the
       Princess Lucretia. He could not complain of her reserve. She threw out her mind in various
       and highly cultivated intelligence. He recognised in her a deep and subtile spirit,
       considerable reading for a woman, habits of thought, and a soul passionate and daring. She
       resolved to subdued one whose appreciation she had gained, and who had subdued her. The
       profound meaning and the calm manner of Sidonia combined to quell her spirit. She struggled
       against the spell. She tried to rival his power; to cope with him, and with the same weapons.
       But prompt as was her thought and bright as was its expression, her heart beat in tumult; and
       with all her apparent serenity, her agitated soul was the prey of absorbing passion. She
       could not contend with that intelligent, yet inscrutable, eye; with that manner so full of
       interest and respect, and yet so tranquil. Besides they were not on equal terms. Here was a
       girl contending with a man learned in the world's way.  
   once occurred companionship. The morning after his arrival they went out
       shooting together. After a long ramble they would stretch themselves on the turf under a
       shady tree, often by the side some brook where the cresses grow, that added a luxury to their
       sporting meal, and then Coningsby would lead their conversation to some subject on which
       Sidonia would pour out his mind with all that depth of reflection, variety of knowledge, and
       richness of illustrative memory, which distinguished him; and which offered so striking a
       contrast to the sharp talent, the shallow information, and the worldly cunning that make a
       Rigby.  
   course well-known that Sidonia was not a marrying man. He was however a great
       friend of Mr. Coningsby, his presence and society brought Coningsby and Lucretia more
       together; and however flattered her daughter might be for the moment by Sidonia's homage,
       still as she would ultimately find out, if indeed she ever cared so to do, that Sidonia could
       only be her admirer, Madame Colonna had no kind of doubt, that ultimately Coningsby would be
       Lucretia's husband, as she had arranged from the first.  
  The Princess Lucretia was a fine horsewoman, though she rarely joined the various
       riding-parties that were daily formed at the Castle. Often indeed, attended only by her
       groom, she met the equestrians. Now she would ride with Sidonia and Coningsby, and as a
       female companion was indispensable, she insisted upon "La Petite" accompanying her. This was
       a fearful trial for Flora, but she encountered it, encouraged by the kind solicitude of
       Coningsby, who always seemed her friend.  
   Archduke and his suite quitted the Castle, which had been His Highness's
       head-quarters during his visit to the manufacturing districts; but no other great change in
       the assembled company occurred for some little time.  
  
  CHAPTER XIII.  
   one hundred and fifty years Power has been deposited in the Parliament, and for
       the last sixty or seventy years it has been becoming more and more unpopular. In 1830 it was
       endeavoured by a reconstruction to regain the popular affection; but in truth, as the
       Parliament then only made itself more powerful, it has only become more odious. As we see
       that the Barons, the Church, the King, have in turn devoured each other, and that the
       Parliament, the last devourer, remains, it is impossible to resist the impression that this
       body also is doomed to be destroyed, and he is a sagacious statesman who may detect in what
       form and in what quarter the great consumer will arise."  
  "You take then a dark view of our position?"  
   all as the Palladium of our liberties; yet a jury at a very recent period of
       our own history, the reign of Charles II. was a tribunal as iniquitous as the Inquisition."
       And a graver expression stole over the countenance of Sidonia as he remembered what that
       Inquisition had operated on his own race and his own destiny. "There are families in this
       country," he continued, "of both the great historical parties, that in the persecution of
       their houses, the murder and proscription of some of their most illustrious members, found
       judges as unjust and relentless in an open jury of their countrymen, as we did in the
       conclaves of Madrid and Seville."  
  "Where then would you look for hope?"  
  "In what is more powerful than laws and institutions, and without which the best laws and
       the most skilful institutions may be a dead letter, or the very means of tyranny; in the
       national character. It is not in the increased feebleness of its institutions that I see the
       peril of England; it is in the decline of its character as a community."  
  "And yet you could scarcely describe this as an age of corruption?"  
  "Not of political corruption. But it is an age of social disorganisation, for more
       dangerous in its consequences, because far more extensive. You may have a corrupt government
       and a pure community; you may have a corrupt community and a pure administration. Which would
       you elect?"  
  "Neither," said Coningsby; "I wish to see a people full of faith, and a government full of
       duty."  
  "Rely upon it," said Sidonia, "that England should think more of the community and less of
       the government."  
  "But tell me, what do you understand by the term national character?"  
  "A character is an assemblage of qualities; the character of England should be an
       assemblage of great qualities."  
  "But we cannot deny that the English have great virtues."  
   of the decline of public virtue, not its existence."  
  "In what then do you trace that decline?"  
  "In the fact that the various classes of this country are arrayed against each other."  
  "But to what do you attribute those reciprocal hostilities?"  
  "Not entirely, not even principally, to those economical causes of which we hear so much. I
       look upon all such as secondary causes which in a certain degree must always exist; which
       obtrude themselves in troubled times; and which at all times it is the business of wise
       statesmen to watch, to regulate, to ameliorate, to modify."  
  "I am speaking to elicit truth, not to maintain opinions," said Coningsby; "for I have
       none," he added mournfully.  
   1640. England had a moderate population, a very improved agriculture, a rich
       commerce; yet she was on the eve of the greatest and most violent changes that she has as yet
       experienced."  
  "That was a religious movement."  
  "Admit it; the cause then was not physical. The imagination of England rose against the
       government. It proves then that when that faculty is astir in a nation, it will sacrifice
       even physical comfort to follow its impulses."  
  "Do you think then there is a wild desire for extensive political change in the
       country?"  
   institutions. A political institution is a machine; the motive power is the
       national character. With that it rests, whether the machine will benefit society, or destroy
       it. Society in this country is perplexed, almost paralyzed; in time it will move, and it will
       devise. How are the elements of the nation to be blended again together? In what spirit is
       that reorganisation to take place?"  
  "To know that would be to know every thing."  
  "At least let us free ourselves from the double ignorance of the Platonists. Let us not be
       ignorant that we are ignorant."  
  "I have emancipated myself from that darkness for a long time," said Coningsby. "Long has
       my mind been musing over these thoughts, but to me all is still obscurity."  
   to the Imagination. Even Mormon counts more votaries than Bentham."  
  "And you think then that as Imagination once subdued the State, Imagination may now save
       it?"  
  "Man is made to adore and to obey: but if you will not command him; if you give him nothing
       to worship; he will fashion his own divinities, and find a chieftain in his own
       passions."  
  "But where can we find faith in a nation of sectaries? Who can feel loyalty to a Sovereign
       of Downing Street?"  
  "I speak of the eternal principles of human nature; you answer me with the passing
       accidents of the hour. Sects rise and sects disappear. Where are the Fifth-Monarchy men?
       England is governed by Downing Street; once it was governed by Alfred and Elizabeth."  
  
  CHAPTER XIV.  
   of the guests. It was agreed that the race should come off at once, before any
       of the present company, many of whom gave symptoms of being on the wing, had quitted the
       Castle. The young guardsman and Mr. Guy Flouncey had surveyed the country, and had selected a
       tract which they esteemed very appropriate for the scene of action. From a hill of common
       land you looked down upon the valley of Coningsby richly cultivated; deeply ditched and
       stiffly fenced; the valley was bounded by another rising ground, and the scene was admirably
       calculated to give an extensive view to a multitude.  
   to side, with good taking off on both banks. This was the critical venture.  
  Lord Monmouth highly approved the scheme, but mentioned that the sweepstakes must be
       moderate and open to the whole county. The neighbourhood had a week of preparation, and the
       entries for the Coningsby steeple-chase were numerous. Lord Monmouth after a reserve for his
       own account placed his stable at the service of his guests. For himself he offered to back
       his horse, Sir Robert, which was to be ridden by his grandson.  
  Now nothing was spoken or thought of at Coningsby Castle except the coming sport. The
       ladies shared the general excitement. They embroidered handkerchiefs, and scarfs, and gloves,
       with the respective colours of the rivals, and tried to make jockey-caps. Lady St. Julians
       postponed her intended departure in consequence. Madame Colonna wished that some means could
       be contrived by which they might all win.  
   he glanced rather sharply at the brook, and on his return to the Castle he sent
       a despatch for some of his stud.  
  Coningsby was all anxiety to win. He was proud of the confidence of his grandfather in
       backing him. He had a powerful horse and a first-rate fencer, and he was resolved himself not
       to flinch. On the night before the race retiring somewhat earlier than usual to his chamber,
       he observed on his dressing-table a small packet addressed to his name, and in an unknown
       hand-writing. Opening it he found a very pretty jockey whip embroidered with his colours of
       pink and white. This was a perplexing circumstance, but he fancied it on the whole a happy
       omen. And who was the donor? Certainly not the Princess Lucretia, for he had observed her
       fashioning some maroon ribands which were the colours of Sidonia. It could scarcely be from
       Mrs. Guy Flouncey. Perhaps Madame Colonna to please—the Marquess? Thinking over this incident
       he fell asleep.  
   Among them was an Arab mare. Coningsby recognised the Daughter of the Star. She
       was greatly admired for her points; but Guy Flouncey whispered to Mr. Melton that she never
       could do the work.  
  "But Lord Beaumanoir says he is all for speed against strength in these affairs," said Mr.
       Melton.  
  Guy Flouncey smiled incredulously.  
  The night before the race it rained heavily.  
  "I take it the country will not be very like the desarts of Arabia," said Mr. Guy Flouncey
       with a knowing look to Mr. Melton, who was noting a bet in his memorandum book.  
   entries were very numerous, though it was understood that not more than a dozen
       would start, and half of these were the guests of Lord Monmouth. At half-past one the cortège
       from the Castle arrived, and took up the post which had been prepared for them on the summit
       of the hill. Lord Monmouth was very much cheered on his arrival. In the carriage with him
       were Madame Colonna and Lady St. Julians. The Princess Lucretia, Lady Gaythorpe, Mrs. Guy
       Flouncey, accompanied by Lord Eskdale and other cavaliers, formed a brilliant company. There
       was scarcely a domestic in the Castle who was not there. The comedians indeed did not care to
       come, but Villebecque prevailed upon Flora to drive with him to the race in a buggy he
       borrowed of the steward.  
   his bridle. In a few moments, the irrevocable monosyllable will be uttered.  
  The bugle sounds for them to face about: the Clerk of the Course sings out: "Gentlemen, are
       you all ready?" No objection made, the word given to go, and fifteen riders start in
       excellent style.  
  Prince Colonna, who rode like Prince Rupert, took the lead, followed close by a stout
       yeoman on an old white horse of great provincial celebrity, who made steady running, and from
       his appearance and action, a dangerous customer. The rest, with two exceptions, followed in a
       cluster at no great distance, and in this order they continued with very slight variation for
       the two first miles, though the fences were frequent and one or two of them awkward. Indeed
       they appeared more like horses running over a course than over a country. The two exceptions
       were Lord Beaumanoir on his horse Sunbeam and Sidonia on the Arab. These kept somewhat
       slightly in the rear.  
   bed for a considerable period. In the midst of this turmoil, the Marquess and
       Sidonia at the same moment cleared the brook.  
   was in his saddle again, and near at hand. It seemed that the Marquess was
       winning. There was only one more fence; and that the foot people had made a breach in by the
       side of a gate post and wide enough, as was said, for a broad wheel waggon to travel by.
       Instead of passing straight over this gap, Sunbeam swerved against the gate and threw his
       rider. This was decisive. The Daughter of the Star, who was still going beautifully, pulling
       freely, and her jockey sitting still, sprang over the gap and went in first, Coningsby on Sir
       Robert being placed second. The distance measured was about four miles; there were
       thirty-nine leaps and it was done under fifteen minutes.  
   might be observed on her usually pale countenance. Villebecque who had betted
       was so extremely excited by the whole affair, especially during the last three minutes, that
       he quite forgot his quiet companion, and when he looked round he found Flora fainting.  
  "You rode well," said Sidonia to Coningsby; "but your horse was more strong than swift.
       After all this thing is a race; and notwithstanding Solomon, in a race speed must win."  
  
  CHAPTER XV.  
  Notwithstanding the fatigues of the morning, the evening was past with great
       gaiety at the castle. The gentlemen all vowed, that far from being inconvenienced by their
       mishaps, they felt, on the whole, rather better for them. Mr. Guy Flouncey indeed did not
       seem quite so limber and flexible as usual; and the young guardsman, who had previously
       discoursed in an almost alarming style of the perils and feats of the Kildare country, had
       subsided into a remarkable reserve.  
   no matter of what kind, he was to be sure to write to his grandfather, who
       would certainly get him out of it.  
  "Your departure is sudden," said the Princess Lucretia in a low deep tone to Sidonia who
       was sitting by her side and screened from general observation by the waltzers who whirled
       by.  
  "Departures should be sudden."  
  "I do not like departures," said the Princess.  
  "Nor did the Queen of Sheba when she quitted Solomon. You know what she did?"  
  "Tell me."  
  "She wept very much, and let one of the King's birds fly into the garden. 'You are freed
       from your cage,' she said; 'but I am going back to mine.'"  
  "But you never weep," said the Princess.  
  "Never."  
  "And are always free?"  
  "So are men in the Desart."  
  "But your life is not a Desart."  
  "It at least resembles the Desart in one respect—it is useless."  
  "The only useless life is woman's."  
  "Yet there have been heroines," said Sidonia.  
  "The Queen of Sheba," said the Princess smiling.  
  "A favourite of mine," said Sidonia.  
  "And why was she a favourite of yours?" rather eagerly inquired Lucretia.  
  "Because she thought deeply, talked finely, and moved gracefully."  
  "And yet might be a very unfeeling dame at the same time," said the Princess.  
  "I never thought of that," said Sidonia.  
  "The heart apparently does not reckon in your philosophy."  
  "What we call the heart," said Sidonia, "is a nervous sensation like shyness which
       gradually disappears in society. It is fervent in the nursery, strong in the domestic circle,
       tumultuous at school. The affections are the children of ignorance; when the horizon of our
       experience expands, and models multiply, love and admiration imperceptibly vanish."  
   very greatly expanded. With your opinions, what charm can there be in
       life?"  
  "The sense of existence."  
  "So Sidonia is off to-morrow, Monmouth," said Lord Eskdale.  
  "Hah!" said the Marquess. "I must get him to breakfast with me before he goes."  
  The party broke up. Coningsby who had heard Lord Eskdale announce Sidonia's departure
       lingered to express his regret and say, farewell.  
  "I cannot sleep," said Sidonia; "and I never smoke in Europe. If you are not stiff with
       your wounds, come to my rooms."  
  This invitation was very willingly accepted.  
  "I am going to Cambridge in a week," said Coningsby. "I was almost in hopes you might have
       remained as long."  
   of state to be transacted without my personal interposition; and so I must go
       up to town immediately."  
  "Suppose you don't pay it," said Coningsby, smiling.  
  "If I followed my own impulse, I would remain here," said Sidonia. "Can anything be more
       absurd than that a nation should apply to an individual to maintain its credit, and with its
       credit, its existence as an empire and its comfort as a people; and that individual one to
       whom its laws deny the proudest rights of citizenship, the privilege of sitting in its senate
       and of holding land; for though I have been rash enough to buy several estates, my own
       opinion is that by the existing law of England, an Englishman of Hebrew faith cannot possess
       the soil."  
  "But surely it would be easy to repeal a law so illiberal—"  
   mind exercises a vast influence on the affairs of Europe. I speak not of their
       laws, which you still obey; of their literature, with which your minds are saturated; but of
       the living Hebrew intellect.  
   materials for the History of Christianity, and studying the genius of the
       place; a modest and learned man. It was Wehl; then unknown, since become the first Arabic
       scholar of the day, and the author of the life of Mahomet. But for the German professors of
       this race, their name is Legion. I think there are more than ten at Berlin alone.  
  "I told you just now that I was going up to town to-morrow, because I always made it a rule
       to interpose when affairs of State were on the carpet. Otherwise, I never interfere. I hear
       of peace and war in newspapers, but I am never alarmed, except when I am informed that the
       Sovereigns want treasure; then I know that monarchs are serious.  
   Czar. However circumstances drew to an approximation between the Romanoffs and
       the Sidonias. I resolved to go myself to St. Petersburgh. I had on my arrival an interview
       with the Russian Minister of Finance, Count Cancrin; I beheld the son of a Lithuanian Jew.
       The loan was connected with the affairs of Spain; I resolved on repairing to Spain from
       Russia. I travelled without intermission. I had an audience immediately on my arrival with
       the Spanish Minister, Senor Mendizabel; I beheld one like myself, the son of a Nuovo
       Christiano, a Jew of Arragon. In consequence of what transpired at Madrid, I went straight to
       Paris to consult the President of the French Council; I beheld the son of a French Jew, a
       hero, an imperial marshal, and very properly so, for who should be military heroes if not
       those who worship the Lord of Hosts?"  
  "And is Soult a Hebrew!"  
   consequence of our consultations was that some Northern power should be applied
       to in a friendly and mediative capacity. We fixed on Prussia, and the President of the
       Council made an application to the Prussian Minister, who attended a few days after our
       conference. Count Arnim entered the cabinet, and I beheld a Prussian Jew. So you see, my dear
       Coningsby, that the world is governed by very different personages to what is imagined by
       those who are not behind the scenes."  
  "You startle, and deeply interest me."  
  "You must study physiology, my dear child. Pure races of Caucasus may be persecuted, but
       they cannot be despised, except by the brutal ignorance of some mongrel breed, that
       brandishes faggots and howls exterminations, but is itself exterminated without persecutions
       by that irresistible law of nature which is fatal to curs."  
  "But I come also from Caucasus," said Coningsby.  
   You come from the shores of the Northern Sea, land of the blue eye, and the
       golden hair, and the frank brow; 'tis a famous breed, with whom we Arabs have contended long;
       from whom we have much suffered; but these Goths, and Saxons, and Normans, were doubtless
       great men."  
  "But so favoured by Nature, why has not your race produced great poets, great orators,
       great writers?"  
   The Hebrew child has entered adolescence only to learn that he was the Pariah
       of that ungrateful Europe that owes to him the best part of its laws a fine portion of its
       literature, all its religion. Great poets require a public; we have been content with the
       immortal melodies that we sung more than two thousand years ago by the waters of Babylon and
       wept. They record our triumphs; they solace our affliction. Great orators are the creatures
       of popular assemblies; we were permitted only by stealth to meet even in our temples. And as
       for great writers the catalogue is not blank. What are all the school-men, Aquinas himself,
       to Maimonides; and as for modern philosophy, all springs from Spinoza.  
   been obliged to bow. The ear, the voice, the fancy teeming with combinations,
       the imagination fervent with picture and emotion, that came from Caucasus and which we have
       preserved unpolluted, have endowed us with almost the exclusive privilege of   Music   the three great creative minds to whose exquisite inventions all nations at
       this moment yield; Rossini, Meyerbeer, Mendelsohn; are of Hebrew race: and little do your men
       of fashion, your 'muscadins' of Paris and your dandies of London, as they thrill into
       raptures at the notes of a Pasta or a Grisi, little do they suspect that they are offering
       their homage to the sweet singers of Israel!"  
  
  CHAPTER XVI.  
  It was the noon of the day on which Sidonia was to leave the Castle. The wind was
       high; the vast white clouds scudded over the blue heaven; the leaves yet green, and tender
       branches snapped like glass, were whirled in eddies from the trees; the grassy sward
       undulated like the ocean with a thousand tints and shadows. From the window of the music-room
       Lucretia Colonna gazed on the turbulent sky.  
  The heaven of her heart too was disturbed.  
  She turned from the agitated external world to ponder over her inward emotion. She uttered
       a deep sigh.  
  Slowly she moved towards her harp; wildly, almost unconsciously, she touched with one hand
       its strings, while her eyes were fixed on the ground. An imperfect melody resounded; yet
       plaintive and passionate. It seemed to attract her soul. She raised her head, and then
       touching the strings with both her hands, she poured forth tones of deep, yet thrilling
       power.  
  "I am a stranger in the halls of a stranger! Ah! whither shall I flee?  
  "To the castle of my fathers in the green mountains; to the palace of my fathers in the
       ancient city?  
  "There is no flag on the castle of my fathers in the green mountains; silent is the palace
       of my fathers in the ancient city.  
  "Is there no home for the homeless; can the unloved never find love?  
  "Ah! thou fliest away fleet cloud:—he will leave us swifter than thee! Alas! cutting wind,
       thy breath is not as cold as his heart!  
  "I am a stranger in the halls of the stranger! Ah! whither shall I flee?"  
  The door of the music room slowly opened. It was Sidonia. His hat was in his hand; he was
       evidently on the point of departure.  
  "Those sounds assured me," he said very calmly, but kindly, as he advanced, "that I might
       find you here, on which I scarcely counted, at so early an hour."  
  "You are going then?" said the Princess.  
  "My carriage is at the door; the Marquess has delayed me; I must be in London to-night. I
       conclude more abruptly than I could have wished one of the most agreeable visits I ever made;
       and I hope you will permit me to express to you how much I am indebted to you for a society
       which those should deem themselves fortunate, who can more frequently enjoy."  
  He held forth his hand; she extended hers, cold as marble, which he bent over, but did not
       press to his lips.  
  "Lord Monmouth talks of remaining here some time," he observed; "but I suppose next year,
       if not this, we shall all meet in some city of the earth."  
  Lucretia bowed, and Sidonia with a graceful reverence withdrew.  
   motionless; a sound attracted her to the window; she perceived the equipage of
       Sidonia whirling along the winding roads of the park. She watched it till it disappeared;
       then quitting the window, she threw herself into a chair and buried her face in her
       shawl.  
  END OF BOOK IV.  
  
  
  BOOK V.  
  CHAPTER I.  
   habituated. The depths of his intellect had been stirred. He was a wiser
       man.  
  He distinguished three individuals whose acquaintance had greatly influenced his mind;
       Eustace Lyle, the elder Millbank, above all, Sidonia. He curiously meditated over the fact,
       that three English subjects, one of them a principal landed proprietor, another one of the
       most eminent manufacturers, and the third the greatest capitalist in the kingdom, all of them
       men of great intelligence, and doubtless of a high probity and conscience, were in their
       hearts, disaffected with the political constitution of the country. Yet unquestionably these
       were the men among whom we ought to seek for some of our first citizens. What then was this
       repulsive quality in those institutions which we persisted in calling national, and which
       once were so? Here was a great question.  
   his time in the continual society of refined and charming women. It is an
       acquaintance which when habitual exercises a great influence over the tone of the mind, even
       if it does not produce any more violent effects. It refines the taste, quickens the
       perception, and gives, as it were, a grace and flexibility to the intellect. Coningsby in his
       solitary rooms arranging his books, sighed when he recalled the Lady Everinghams and the Lady
       Theresas; the gracious Duchess; the frank, good-tempered Madame Colonna; that deeply
       interesting enigma, the Princess Lucretia; and the gentle Flora. He thought with disgust of
       the impending dissipation of an University, which could only be an exaggeration of their
       coarse frolics at school. It seemed rather vapid this mighty Cambridge over which they had so
       often talked in the playing fields of Eton with such anticipations of its vast and absorbing
       interest. And those University honours that once were the great object of his aspirations,
       they did not figure in that grandeur with which they once haunted his imagination.  
  What Coningsby determined to conquer was knowledge. He had watched the influence of Sidonia
       in society with an eye of unceasing vigilance. Coningsby perceived that all yielded to him;
       that Lord Monmouth even, who seemed to respect none, gave place to his intelligence; appealed
       to him, listened to him, was guided by him. What was the secret of this influence? Knowledge.
       On all subjects his views were prompt and clear, and this not more from his native sagacity
       and reach of view, than from the aggregate of facts which rose to guide his judgment, and
       illustrate his meaning from all countries and all ages instantly at his command.  
   dinners at fashionable cafés. Vere enjoyed Cambridge most, because he had been
       staying with his family since he quitted Eton. Henry Sydney was full of church architecture,
       national sports, restoration of the order of the Peasantry, and was to maintain a constant
       correspondence on these and similar subjects with Eustace Lyle. Finally however they all fell
       into a very fair, regular, routine life. They all read a little, but not with the enthusiasm
       which they had once projected. Buckhurst drove four-in-hand, and they all of them sometimes
       assisted him; but not immoderately. Their suppers were sometimes gay, but never outrageous;
       and among all of them, the school friendship was maintained unbroken, and even
       undisturbed.  
   intimate only with his old friends, and giving always an impression in his
       general tone that his soul was not absorbed in his University.  
   political institutions are meat without salt; the Crown a bauble, the Church an
       establishment, Parliaments debating clubs, and Civilization itself but a fitful and transient
       dream.  
  
  CHAPTER II.  
  Less than a year after the arrival of Coningsby at Cambridge, and which he had
       only once quitted in the interval, and that to pass a short time in Berkshire with his friend
       Buckhurst, occurred the death of King William IV. This event necessarily induced a
       dissolution of the Parliament elected under the auspices of Sir Robert Peel in 1834, and
       after the publication of the Tamworth manifesto.  
   more injury to the Tories than the attempt to govern this country without a
       decided Parliamentary majority did the Whigs. The greatest of all evils is a weak government.
       They cannot carry good measures, they are forced to carry bad ones.  
  rend="stars" unit="subsection"/ 
   their pledges. Yet a cry must be found. A dissolution without a cry, in the
       Taper philosophy, would be a world without a sun. A rise might be got by "Independence of the
       House of Lords;" and Lord Lyndhurst's summaries might be well circulated at one penny per
       hundred, large discount allowed to Conservative Associations and endless credit. Tadpole
       however was never very fond of the House of Lords; besides it was too limited. Tadpole wanted
       the young Queen brought in; the rogue! At length one morning, Taper came up to him with a
       slip of paper and a smile of complacent austerity on his dull visage, "I think Mr. Tadpole
       that will do."  
  Tadpole took the paper and read "   Our young Queen, and our old Institutions   !"  
  The eyes of Tadpole sparkled as if they had met a gnomic sentence of Periander or Thales;
       then turning to Taper, he said,  
  "What do you think of 'ancient,' instead of 'old'?"  
  "You cannot have 'Our modern Queen, and our ancient Institutions,'" said Mr. Taper.  
  The dissolution was soon followed by an election for the borough of Cambridge. The
       "Conservative Cause" candidate was an old Etonian. That was a bond of sympathy which imparted
       zeal even to those who were a little sceptical of the essential virtues of Conservativism.
       Every under-graduate especially who remembered "the distant spires," became enthusiastic.
       Buckhurst took a very decided part. He cheered, he canvassed, he brought men to the poll whom
       none could move; he influenced his friends and his companions. Even Coningsby caught the
       contagion, and Vere, who had imbibed much of Coningsby's political sentiment, prevailed on
       himself to be neutral. The Conservative Cause triumphed in the person of its Eton champion.
       The day the member was chaired, several men in Coningsby's rooms were talking over their
       triumph.  
   added, laughing, "if any fellow were to ask me what the Conservative Cause was,
       I am sure I should not know what to say."  
  "Why it's the cause of our glorious institutions," said Coningsby. "A Crown robbed of its
       prerogatives; a Church controlled by a commission; and an Aristocracy that does not
       lead."  
  "Under whose genial influence, the order of the Peasantry, 'a country's pride,' has
       vanished from the face of the land," said Henry Sydney, "and is succeeded by a race of serfs,
       who are called labourers and who burn ricks."  
  "Under which," continued Coningsby, "the crown has become a cipher; the church a sect; the
       nobility drones; and the people drudges."  
  "It is the great constitutional cause," said Lord Vere, "that refuses everything to
       opposition; yields everything to agitation: conservative in Parliament, destructive out of
       doors; that has no objection to any change provided only it be effected by unauthorized
       means."  
  "The first public association of men," said Coningsby, "who have worked for an avowed end,
       without enunciating a single principle."  
  "And who have established political infidelity throughout the land," said Lord Henry.  
  "By Jove!" said Buckhurst, "what infernal fools we have made ourselves this last week!"  
  "Nay," said Coningsby, smiling, "it was our last schoolboy weakness. Floreat Etona, under
       all circumstances."  
  "I certainly, Coningsby," said Lord Vere, "shall not assume the Conservative Cause, instead
       of the Cause for which Hampden died in the field, and Sydney on the scaffold."  
  "The cause for which Hampden died in the field, and Sydney on the scaffold," said
       Coningsby, "was the cause of the Venetian Republic."  
  "How—how?" said Buckhurst.  
   you, Vere, to relinquish the political tenets which in ordinary times would
       have been your inheritance. All I say is, the constitution introduced by your ancestors
       having been subverted by their descendants your contemporaries, beware of still holding
       Venetian principles of government when you have not a Venetian constitution to govern with.
       Do what I am doing, what Henry Sydney and Buckhurst are doing, what other men that I could
       mention are doing, hold yourself aloof from political parties which, from the necessity of
       things, have ceased to have distinctive principles, and are therefore practically only
       factions; and wait and see, whether with patience, energy, honour, and Christian faith, and a
       desire to look to the national welfare and not to sectional and limited interests; whether, I
       say, we may not discover some great principles to guide us, to which we may adhere, and which
       then, if true, will ultimately guide and control others."  
  "The Whigs are worn out," said Vere, "Conservativism is a sham, and Radicalism is
       pollution."  
  "I certainly," said Buckhurst, "when I get into the House of Commons, shall speak my mind
       without reference to any party whatever; and all I hope is, we may all come in at the same
       time, and then we may make a party of our own."  
  "I have always heard my father say," said Vere, "that there was nothing so difficult as to
       organize an independent party in the House of Commons."  
  "Ay! but that was in the Venetian period, Vere," said Henry Sydney smiling.  
  "I dare say," said Buckhurst, "the only way to make a party in the House of Commons is just
       the one that succeeds anywhere else. Men must associate together. When you are living in the
       same set, dining together every day, and quizzing the Dons, it is astonishing how well men
       agree. As for me, I never would enter into a conspiracy, unless the conspirators were fellows
       who had been at Eton with me; and then there would be no treachery."  
  "Let us think of principles, and not of parties," said Coningsby.  
  "For my part," said Buckhurst, "whenever a political system is breaking up, as in this
       country at present, I think the very best thing is to brush all the old Dons off the stage.
       They never take to the new road kindly. They are always hampered by their exploded prejudices
       and obsolete traditions. I don't think a single man, Vere, that sat in the Venetian Senate
       ought to be allowed to sit in the present English House of Commons."  
  "Well no one does in our family except my uncle Philip," said Lord Henry; "and the moment I
       want it, he will resign; for he detests Parliament. It interferes so with his hunting."  
  "Well, we have all fair parliamentary prospects," said Buckhurst. "That is something. I
       wish we were in now."  
  "Heaven forbid," said Coningsby. "I tremble at the responsibility of a seat at any time.
       With my present unsettled and perplexed views, there is nothing from which I should recoil so
       much as the House of Commons."  
   "The best thing we can do is to keep as clear of political party as we possibly
       can. How many men waste the best part of their lives in painfully apologising for a
       conscientious deviation from a parliamentary course which they adopted when they were boys,
       without thought, or prompted by some local connexion or interest to secure a seat."  
  It was the midnight following the morning when this conversation took place, that Coningsby
       alone, and having just quitted a rather boisterous party of wassailers who had been
       celebrating at Buckhurst's rooms the triumph of "Eton Statesmen," if not of Conservative
       principles, stopped in the precincts of that Royal College, that reminded him of his
       school-days, to cool his brow in the summer air, that even at that hour was soft, and to calm
       his mind in the contemplation of the still, the sacred, and the beauteous scene that
       surrounded him.  
   shrouded in the deepest darkness, while a flood of silver light suffused its
       southern side, distinguished with revealing beam the huge ribs of its buttresses, and bathed
       with mild lustre its airy pinnacles.  
  "Where is the spirit that raised these walls?" thought Coningsby. "Is it indeed extinct? Is
       then this civilization, so much vaunted, inseparable from moderate feelings and little
       thoughts? If so, give me back barbarism! But I cannot believe it. Man that is made in the
       image of the Creator, is made for God-like deeds. Come what come may, I will cling to the
       heroic principle. It can alone satisfy my soul."  
  
  CHAPTER III.  
  We must now revert to the family, or rather the household of Lord Monmouth, in
       which considerable changes and events had occurred since the visit of Coningsby to the Castle
       in the preceding autumn.  
   had been intent upon the subject, skilful as had been his combinations to
       secure his prey, and unlimited the means which were to achieve his purpose, another stepped
       in, and without his privity, without even the consolation of a struggle, stole away the
       prize; and this too a man whom he hated, almost the only individual out of his own family
       that he did hate; a man who had crossed him before in similar enterprises; who was his avowed
       foe; had lavished treasure to oppose him in elections; raised associations against his
       interest; established journals to assail him; denounced him in public; agitated against him
       in private; had declared more than once that he would make "the county too hot for him;" his
       personal, inveterate, indomitable foe, Mr. Millbank of Millbank.  
   quailed; that play of the eye which Lord Monmouth shared in common with Henry
       VIII. that struck awe into the trembling Commons when they had given an obnoxious vote, as
       the King entered the gallery of his palace, and looked around him.  
  It was a look which implied the dreadful question: "Why have I bought you that such thing
       should happen? Why have I unlimited means and unscrupulous agents?" It made even Rigby feel;
       even his brazen tones were hushed.  
   there were really no feelings to play upon. He saw through everybody and
       everything; and when he had detected their purpose, discovered their weakness or their
       vileness, he calculated whether they could contribute to his pleasure or his convenience in a
       degree which counter-balanced the objections which might be urged against their intentions,
       or their less pleasing and profitable qualities. To be pleased was always a principal object
       with Lord Monmouth; but when a man wants vengeance, gay amusement is not exactly a
       satisfactory substitute.  
   its possible consequences, distracted the Marquess from his brooding
       meditations over his discomfiture in the matter of Hellingsley. The Prince Colonna, who,
       since the steeple-chase, had imbibed a morbid predilection for such amusements, and indeed
       for every species of rough riding, was thrown from his horse and killed on the spot.  
   even sympathy. But he wanted somebody to do everything that was proper; to be
       considerate and consoling and sympathetic. Mr. Rigby did it all; gave evidence at the
       inquest, was chief mourner at the funeral, and arranged everything so well that not a single
       emblem of death crossed the sight of Lord Monmouth; while Madame Colonna found submission in
       his exhortations, and the Princess Lucretia, a little more pale and pensive than usual,
       listened with tranquillity to his discourse on the vanity of all sublunary things.  
   her to return to Italy. This notice of her return to her own country seemed to
       occasion the Marquess great disquietude.  
   was extremely anxious to know which way the wind blew, and the mission with
       which he had been entrusted, fell in precisely with his inclinations and necessities. The
       Marquess listened to the communication and sighed, then turned gently round and surveyed
       himself in the mirror and sighed again, then said to Rigby:  
  "You understand exactly what I mean, Rigby. It is quite ridiculous their going, and
       infinitely distressing to me. They must stay."  
   or more content, and more cheerful. As for the Marquess himself, Mr. Rigby
       never remembered him more serene and even joyous. His Lordship scarcely ever entered general
       society. The Colonna family remained in strict seclusion; and he preferred the company of
       these accomplished and congenial friends to the mob of the great world.  
  Between Madame Colonna and Mr. Rigby there had always subsisted considerable confidence.
       Now, that gentleman seemed to have achieved fresh and greater claims to her regard. In the
       pleasure with which he looked forward to her approaching alliance with his patron, he
       reminded her of the readiness with which he had embraced her suggestions for the marriage of
       her daughter with Coningsby. Always obliging, she was never wearied of chaunting his praises
       to her noble admirer, who was apparently much gratified she should have bestowed her esteem
       on one of whom she would necessarily in after life see so much. It is seldom the lot of
       husbands that their confidential friends gain the regards of their brides.  
  "I am delighted you all like Rigby," said Lord Monmouth, "as you will see so much of
       him."  
  The remembrance of the Hellingsley failure seemed to be quite erased from the memory of the
       Marquess. Rigby never recollected him more cordial and confidential, and more equable in his
       manner. He told Rigby one day, that he wished that Monmouth House should possess the most
       sumptuous and the most fanciful boudoir in London or Paris. What a hint for Rigby! That
       gentleman consulted the first artists, and gave them some hints in return; his researches on
       domestic decoration ranged through all ages; he even meditated a rapid tour to mature his
       inventions; but his confidence in his native taste and genius, ultimately convinced him that
       this movement was unnecessary.  
   Act, already gained by the Conservative cause! Here was reaction—here influence
       of property! Influence of character, too; for no one was so popular as Lord Monmouth; a most
       distinguished nobleman, of strict Conservative principles, who, if he carried the county and
       the manufacturing borough also, merited the straw-berry -leaf.  
  "There will be no holding Rigby," said Taper; "I'm afraid he will be looking for something
       very high."  
  "The higher the better," rejoined Tadpole, "and then he will not interfere with us. I like
       your high-fliers; it is your plodders I detest, wearing old hats and high-lows, speaking in
       committee, and thinking they are men of business: d—n them!"  
   too much with history, especially with the French Revolution, which he fancied
       was his "forte," so that the people at last, whenever he made any allusion to the subject,
       were almost as much terrified as if they had seen the guillotine.  
  Rigby had as yet one great advantage; he had no opponent; and without personal opposition,
       no contest can be very bitter. It was for some days Rigby versus Liberal principles; and
       Rigby had much the best of it; for he abused Liberal principles roundly in his harangues, who
       not being represented on the occasion made no reply; while plenty of ale, and some capital
       songs by Lucian Gay, who went down express, gave the right cue to the mob, who declared in
       chorus, beneath the windows of Rigby's hotel, that he was "a fine old English gentleman!"  
   Jawster Sharp thought at one time that sheer necessity would give him another
       chance still; but even Rigby was preferable to Jawster Sharp, who, finding it would not do,
       published his long-prepared valedictory address, in which he told his constituents, that
       having long sacrificed his health to their interests, he was now obliged to retire into the
       bosom of his family. And a very well provided for family, too.  
   if money were ready, money would not take pledges. In fact they wanted a
       Phoenix; a very rich man, who would do exactly as they liked, with extremely low opinions and
       with very high connexions.  
  "If he would go for the ballot and had a handle to his name, it would have the best
       effect," said the secretary of the Reform Association, "because you see we are fighting
       against a Right Honourable, and you have no idea how that takes with the mob."  
   Juggins, a distiller, £2000 man; but would not agree to any annual
       subscriptions. Sir Baptist Placid, vague about expenditure, but repeatedly declaring that
       "there could be no difficulty on that head." He however had a moral objection to subscribing
       to the races,— and that was a great point at Darlford. Sir Baptist would subscribe a guinea
       per annum to the Infirmary, and the same to all religious Societies, without any distinction
       of sects—but races, it was not the sum, £100 per annum, but the principle. He had a moral
       objection.  
  In short the deputation began to suspect what was the truth, that they were a day after the
       fair, and that all the electioneering rips that swarm in the purlieus of political clubs
       during an impending dissolution of Parliament, men who become political characters in their
       small circle, because they have been talked of as once having an intention to stand for
       places for which they never offered themselves, or for having stood for places, where they
       never could by any circumstance have succeeded, were in fact nibbling at their dainty
       morsel.  
  At this moment of despair, a ray of hope was imparted to them by a confidential note from a
       secretary of the Treasury, who wished to see them at the Reform Club on the morrow. You may
       be sure they were punctual to their appointment. The secretary received them with great
       consideration. He had got them a candidate, and one of high mark—the son of a Peer, and
       connected with the highest Whig houses. Their eyes sparkled. A real honourable. If they liked
       he would introduce them immediately to the Honourable Alberic de Crecy. He had only to
       introduce them, as there was no difficulty either as to means or opinions, expenses or
       pledges.  
   were what is sometimes emphatically styled flabbergasted; they were speechless
       from bewilderment. "Mr. de Crecy will go for the ballot," said the secretary of the Treasury
       with an audacious eye and a demure look, "and for Total and Immediate if you press him hard;
       but don't if you can help it, because he has an uncle, an old county member who has
       prejudices, and might disinherit him. However, we answer for him. And I am very happy that I
       have been the means of bringing about an arrangement, which I feel will be mutually
       advantageous." And so saying the secretary effected his escape.  
   with a letter to the Independent Electors from Mr. Millbank the new proprietor
       of Hellingsley.  
  He expressed himself as one not anxious to obtrude himself on their attention and founding
       no claim to their confidence on his recent acquisition; but at the same time as one resolved
       that the free and enlightened community, with which he must necessarily hereafter be much
       connected, should not become the nomination Borough of any Peer of the realm without a
       struggle if they chose to make one. And so he offered himself if they could not find a better
       candidate without waiting for the ceremony of a requisition. He was exactly the man they
       wanted; and though he had "no handle to his name," and was somewhat impracticable about
       pledges, his fortune was so great, and his character so high, that it might be hoped that the
       people would be almost as content as if they were appealed to by some obscure scion of
       factitious nobility subscribing to political engagements which he could not comprehend, and
       which in general are vomited with as much facility as they are swallowed.  
  
  CHAPTER IV.  
   the contagion of popular feeling, the town was divided into two parties, the
       vast majority of which were firmly convinced that the country could only be saved by the
       return of Mr. Rigby, or preserved from inevitable destruction by the election of Mr.
       Millbank.  
   up their minds without duly weighing the respective merits of the two rivals.
       This class of deeply meditative individuals are distinguished not only by their pensive turn
       of mind; but by a charitable vein that seems to pervade their being. Not only will they think
       of your request, but for their parts they wish both sides equally well. Decision indeed, as
       it must dash the hopes of one of their solicitors, seems infinitely painful to them; they
       have always a good reason for postponing it. If you seek their suffrage during the canvass,
       they reply that the writ not having come down, the day of election is not yet fixed. If you
       call again to inform them that the writ has arrived, they rejoin that perhaps after all there
       may not be a contest. If you call a third time half dead with fatigue, to give them friendly
       notice that both you and your rival have pledged yourselves to go to the poll, they twitch
       their trowsers, rub their hands, and with a dull grin observe,  
  "Well, sir, we shall see."  
   with an insinuating smile, "give Mr. Millbank one."  
  "Jobson, I think you and I know each other," says a most influential supporter with a
       knowing nod.  
  "Yes, Mr. Smith, I should think we did."  
  "Come, come, give us one."  
  "Well, I have not made up my mind yet, gentlemen."  
  "Jobson!" says a solemn voice. "Didn't you tell me the other night you wished well to this
       gentleman?"  
  "So I do; I wish well to everybody," replies the imperturbable Jobson.  
  "Well, Jobson," exclaims another member of the committee with a sigh, "who could have
       supposed that you would have been an enemy!"  
  "I don't wish to be no enemy to no man, Mr. Trip."  
  "Come, Jobson," says a jolly tanner, "if I wanted to be a Parliament man, I don't think you
       could refuse me one!"  
  "I don't think I could Mr. Oakfield."  
  "Well then give it to my friend."  
  "Well, sir, I'll think about it."  
  "Leave him to me," says another member of the committee with a significant look. "I know
       how to get round him. It's all right."  
  "Yes, leave him to Hayfield, Mr. Millbank, he knows how to manage him."  
  But all the same, Jobson continues to look as little tractable and lamb-like as can be well
       fancied.  
   to the Reform Bill; that in such a borough under such circumstances there
       should be a contest, and that too one of a very doubtful issue.  
  What was the cause of this? Are we to seek it in the "Re-action" of the Tadpoles and the
       Tapers? That would not be a very satisfactory solution. Re-action to a certain extent is the
       law of human existence. In the particular state of affairs before us; England after the
       Reform Act; it never could be doubtful, that Time would gradually, and in some instances,
       rapidly, counteract the national impulse of 1832. There never could have been a question, for
       example, that the English counties would have reverted to their natural allegiance to their
       proprietors; but the results of the appeals to the third Estate in 1835 and 1837 are not to
       be accounted for by a mere re-adjustment of legitimate influences.  
   in council; sedulous in office; eminent as scholars; powerful from their
       position; the absence of individual influence, of the pervading authority of a commanding
       mind, has been the cause of the fall of the Whig party.  
   we trace the irresistible influence of the individual.  
  And yet the interval that elapsed between 1835 and 1837 proved, that there was all this
       time in the Whig array one entirely competent to the office of leading a great party, though
       his capacity for that fulfilment was too tardily recognised.  
    Lord John Russell   impulse could scarcely overcome. But he is experienced in debate; quick in
       reply, fertile in resource; takes large views; and frequently compensates for a dry and
       hesitating manner by the expression of those noble truths, that flash across the fancy, and
       rise spontaneously to the lip, of men of poetic temperament when addressing popular
       assemblies. If we add to this a private life of dignified repute; the accidents of his birth
       and rank, which never can be severed from the man, the scion of a great historic family, and
       born as it were to the hereditary service of the State; it is difficult to ascertain at what
       period, or under what circumstances, the Whig party have ever possessed, or could obtain, a
       more efficient leader.  
  But we must return to the Darlford election. The class of thoughtful voters was
       sufficiently numerous in that borough to render the result of the contest doubtful to the
       last, and on the eve of the day of nomination both parties were equally sanguine.  
   that little mere form. The tedious hours remain; and no one can settle his mind
       to any thing. It is not a holiday, for every one is serious; it is not business, for no one
       can attend to it; it is not a contest, for there is no canvassing; nor an election, for there
       is no poll. It is a day of lounging without an object, and luncheons without an appetite; of
       hopes and fears; confidence and dejection; bravado bets and secret hedging; and about
       midnight, of furious suppers of grilled bones, brandy-and-water, and recklessness.  
   nomination day should not be cut short: moreover there is nothing that the mob
       likes so much as a speech. Rigby therefore had on the whole a far from unfavourable audience,
       and he availed himself of their forbearance. He brought in his crack theme the guillotine,
       and dilated so elaborately upon its qualities, that one of the gentlemen below could not
       refrain from exclaiming: "I wish you may get it." This exclamation gave Mr. Rigby what is
       called a great opening, which, like a practised speaker, he immediately seized. He denounced
       the sentiment as "un-English," and got very much cheered. Excited by this success Rigby began
       calling everything else "un-English" with which he did not agree, until menacing murmurs
       began to rise, when he shifted the subject, and rose into a grand peroration, in which he
       assured them that the eyes of the whole empire were on this particular election, (cries of
       "that's true," from all sides) and that England expected every man to do his duty.  
   inquired a gentleman below, "about that ere pension?"  
  "Rigby," screeched a hoarse voice, "don't you mind; you guv it them well."  
  "Rigby, keep up your spirits old chap: we will have you."  
  "Now," said a stentorian voice, and a man as tall as Saul looked round him. This was the
       engaged leader of the Conservative mob; the eye of every one of his minions was instantly on
       him. "Now! Our young Queen and our old institutions; Rigby for ever!"  
  This was a signal for the instant appearance of the leader of the Liberal mob. Magog Wrath,
       not so tall as Bully Bluck his rival, had a voice almost as powerful, a back much broader,
       and a countenance far more forbidding. "Now, my boys; the Queen and Millbank for ever."  
   contest; it appeared to be a most alarming and perilous fray; several ladies
       from the windows screamed, one fainted; a band of special constables pushed their way through
       the mob; you heard their staves resounding on the skulls of all who opposed them, especially
       the little boys: order was at length restored; and to tell the truth, the only hurts
       inflicted were those which came from the special constables. Bully Bluck and Magog Wrath,
       with all their fierce looks, flaunting colours, loud cheers, and desperate assaults, were
       after all only a couple of Condottieri, who were cautious never to wound each other. They
       were in fact a very peaceful police, who kept the town in awe, and prevented others from
       being mischievous who were more inclined to do harm. Their hired gangs were the safety valves
       for all the scamps of the borough, who receiving a few shillings per head for their nominal
       service, and as much drink as they liked after the contest, were bribed and organised into
       peace and sobriety on the days in which their excesses were most to be apprehended.  
  Now Mr. Millbank came forward: he was very brief compared with Mr. Rigby; but clear and
       terse. No one could misunderstand him. He did not favour his hearers with any history, but
       gave them his views about taxes, free trade, placemen and pensioners, whoever and wherever
       they might be.  
  "Hilloa, Rigby, about that ere pension?"  
  "Millbank for ever! We will have him."  
  "Never mind, Rigby, you'll come in next time."  
  Mr. Millbank was very energetic about resident representatives, but did not understand that
       a resident representative meant the nominee of a great lord, who lived in a great castle,
       (great cheering). There was a Lord once who declared that if he liked, he would return his
       negro valet to Parliament; but Mr. Millbank thought those days were over. It remained for the
       people of Darlford to determine whether he was mistaken.  
  "Never!" exclaimed the mob. "Millbank for ever! Rigby in the river! No niggers, no
       walets!"  
  "Three groans for Rigby."  
   chaps," said a critic below; "but he speaks from his art; and give me the man
       who as got a art."  
  "That's your time of day, Mr. Robinson."  
  "Now," said Magog Wrath looking around.  
  "Now—the Queen and Millbank for ever! Hurrah!"  
  The show of hands was entirely in favour of Mr. Millbank. Scarcely a hand was held up for
       Mr. Rigby below, except by Bully Bluck and his prætorians. The Chairman and the Deputy
       Chairman of the Conservative Association, the Secretary and the four agents severally and
       respectively went up to Mr. Rigby and congratulated him on the result, as it was a known fact
       "that the show of hands never won."  
   minds; the enthusiasts who have told you twenty times a day for the last
       fortnight, that they would get up in the middle of the night to serve you, require the most
       watchful cooping; all the individuals who have assured you that "their word is their bond,"
       change sides.  
  Two of the Rigbyites met in the marketplace about an hour after midnight.  
  "Well, how goes it?" said one.  
  "I have been the rounds. The blunts going like the ward-pump. I saw a man come out of
       Moffatt's house, muffled up with a mask on. I dodged him. It was Biggs."  
  "You don't mean that, do you? D—e I'll answer for Moffatt."  
  "I never thought he was a true man."  
  "Told Robins?"  
  "I could not see him; but I met young Gunning and told him."  
  "Young Gunning! That won't do."  
  "I thought he was as right as the town clock."  
  "So did I once. Hush! who comes here? The enemy, Franklin and Sampson Potts. Keep
       close."  
  "I'll speak to them. Good night, Potts. Up rather late to-night?"  
  "All fair election time. You ain't snoring are you?"  
  "Well, I hope the best man will win."  
  "I am sure he will."  
  "You must go for Moffatt early, to breakfast at the White Lion; that's your sort. Don't
       leave him, and poll him yourself. I am going off to Solomon Lacey's. He has got four
       Millbankites cooped up very drunk, and I want to get them quietly into the country before
       daybreak."  
  'Tis polling day! The candidates are roused from their slumbers at an early hour by the
       music of their own bands perambulating the town, and each playing the "conquering hero" to
       sustain the courage of their jaded employers by depriving them of that rest which can alone
       tranquillize the nervous system. There is something in that matin burst of music, followed by
       a shrill cheer from the boys of the borough, the only inhabitants yet up, that is very
       depressing.  
  The committee-rooms of each candidate are soon rife with black reports; each side has
       received fearful bulletins of the preceding night campaign; and its consequences as
       exemplified in the morning, unprecedented tergiversations, mysterious absences; men who
       breakfast with one side and vote with the other; men who won't come to breakfast; men who
       won't leave breakfast.  
  At ten o'clock Mr. Rigby was in a majority of twenty-eight.  
   Soon after this, Mr. Millbank was declared by his Committee to be in a majority
       of one, but the Committee of Mr. Rigby instantly posted a placard in large letters to
       announce that on the contrary their man was in a majority of nine.  
  "If we could only have got another registration," whispered the principal agent to Mr.
       Rigby at a quarter past four.  
  "You think it's all over then?"  
  "Why I do not see now how we can win. We have polled all our dead men, and Millbank is
       seven a head."  
  "I have no doubt we shall be able to have a good petition," said the consoling chairman of
       the Conservative Association.  
  
  CHAPTER V.  
   thought or said, what even might be the injurious effect on his own career of
       the loss of his election, assumed an insignificant character when compared with its influence
       on the temper and disposition of the Marquess of Monmouth.  
  And yet his carriage is now entering the court-yard of Monmouth House, and in all
       probability a few minutes would introduce him to that presence before which he had ere this
       trembled. The Marquess was at home, and anxious to see Mr. Rigby. In a very few minutes that
       gentleman was ascending the private staircase, entering the antechamber, and waiting to be
       received in the little saloon, exactly as our Coningsby did more than five years ago,
       scarcely less agitated, but by feelings of a very different character.  
  "Well, you made a good fight of it," exclaimed the Marquess in a cheerful and particularly
       cordial tone, as Mr. Rigby entered his dressing-room. "Patience! We shall win next time."  
   candidate, though its contrast to that which he expected, rather perplexed him.
       He entered into the details of the election, talked rapidly of the next registration, the
       propriety of petitioning; accustomed himself to hearing his voice with its habitual
       volubility in a chamber where he had feared it might not sound for some time.  
  "D—n politics!" said the Marquess. "These fellows are in for this parliament, and I am
       really weary of the whole affair. I begin to think the Duke was right, and it would have been
       best to have left them to themselves. I am glad you have come up at once, for I want you. The
       fact is, I am going to be married."  
   forgotten. Fortunate Rigby! Disgusted by the failure of his political
       combinations, his disappointments in not dictating to the county and not carrying the
       borough, and the slight prospect at present of obtaining the great object of his ambition,
       Lord Monmouth had resolved to precipitate his fate, was about to marry immediately, and quit
       England.  
  "You will be wanted, Rigby," continued the Marquess. "We must have a couple of trustees,
       and I have thought of you as one. You know you are my executor; and it is better not to bring
       in unnecessarily new names into the management of my affairs. Lord Eskdale will act with
       you."  
   of his great and impending destiny. Lord Monmouth's executor, and very probably
       one of his residuary legatees! A legatee of some sort he knew he was. What a splendid memento
       mori! What cared Rigby for the borough of Darlford? And as for his political friends, he
       wished them joy of their barren benches. Nothing was lost by not being in this
       Parliament.  
  It was then with sincerity that Rigby offered his congratulations to his patron. He praised
       the judicious alliance, accompanied by every circumstance conducive to worldly happiness;
       distinguished beauty, perfect temper, princely rank. Rigby, who had hardly got out of his
       hustings' vein, was most eloquent in his praises of Madame Colonna.  
  "A very amiable woman," said Lord Monmouth, "and very handsome. I always admired her; and a
       very agreeable person too; I dare say a very good temper, but I am not going to marry
       her."  
  "Might I then ask who is—"  
   replied the Marquess very quietly, and looking at his ring.  
  Here was a thunderbolt! Rigby had made another mistake. He had been working all this time
       for the wrong woman! The consciousness of being a trustee alone sustained him. There was an
       inevitable pause. The Marquess would not speak however, and Rigby must. He babbled rather
       incoherently about the Princess Lucretia being admired by every body; also that she was the
       most fortunate of women, as well as the most accomplished; he was just beginning to say he
       had known her from a child, when discretion stopped his tongue, which had a habit of running
       on somewhat rashly; but Rigby, though he often blundered in his talk, had the talent of
       extricating himself from the consequence of his mistakes.  
  "And Madame must be highly gratified by all this?" observed Mr. Rigby with an inquiring
       accent. He was dying to learn how she had first received the intelligence, and congratulated
       himself that his absence at his contest had preserved him from the storm.  
  "Madame Colonna knows nothing of our intentions," said Lord Monmouth. "And by the bye, that
       is the very business on which I wished to see you, Rigby. I wish you to communicate them to
       her. We are to be married, and immediately. It would gratify me that the wife of Lucretia's
       father should attend our wedding. You understand exactly what I mean, Rigby—I must have no
       scenes. Always happy to see the Princess Colonna under my roof; but then I like to live
       quietly, particularly at present; harassed as I have been by the loss of these elections, by
       all this bad management, and by all these disappointments on subjects in which I was led to
       believe success was certain. Madame Colonna is at home," and the Marquess bowed Mr. Rigby out
       of the room.  
  
  CHAPTER VI.  
   her development with interest; and had witnessed her launched in that world
       where she floated at once with as much dignity and consciousness of superior power, as if she
       had braved for seasons its waves and its tempests.  
   serpent; indeed there was an undulating movement in Lucretia when she
       approached you, which irresistibly reminded you of that mysterious animal.  
  Lord Monmouth was not insensible to the spell, though totally unconscious of its purpose.
       He found the society of Lucretia very agreeable to him; she was animated, intelligent,
       original; her inquiries were stimulating; her comments on what she saw, and heard, and read,
       racy and often indicating a fine humour. But all this was reserved for his ear. Before her
       parents as before all others, Lucretia was silent, a little scornful, never communicating,
       neither giving nor seeking amusement, shut up in herself.  
   which represented in his mind a continuance of good eating and good drinking,
       fine horses, luxurious baths, unceasing billiards.  
  In this state of affairs appeared Sidonia, known before to her step-mother, but seen by
       Lucretia for the first time. Truly he came, saw, and conquered. Those eyes that rarely met
       anothers, were fixed upon his searching yet unimpassioned glance. She listened to that voice
       full of music, yet void of tenderness: and the spirit of Lucretia Colonna bowed before an
       intelligence that commanded sympathy, yet offered none.  
   ever been instilled into her being. Frequent absence from her own country had
       by degrees broken off even an habitual observance of the forms of her creed; while a life of
       undisturbed indulgence, void of all anxiety and care, while it preserved her from many of the
       temptations to vice, deprived her of that wisdom "more precious than rubies" which adversity
       and affliction, the struggles and the sorrows of existence, can alone impart.  
   that required no formal exposition, no proofs and illustrations, no comment and
       no gloss; which was indeed rather a traditional conviction than an imparted dogma; that the
       exoterick public were on many subjects the victims of very vulgar prejudices, which these
       enlightened personages wished neither to disturb nor to adopt.  
  A being of such a temper, bred in such a manner; a woman full of intellect and ambition,
       daring and lawless, and satiated with prosperity, is not made for equable fortunes and an
       uniform existence. She would have sacrificed the world for Sidonia, for he had touched the
       fervent imagination that none before could approach, but that inscrutable man would not read
       the secret of her heart, and prompted alike by pique, the love of power, and a weariness of
       her present life, Lucretia resolved on that great result which Mr. Rigby is now about to
       communicate to the Princess Colonna.  
   at the same time. The sound even reached the Marquess in his luxurious recess,
       who immediately took a pinch of snuff and ordered his valet to lock the door of the
       ante-chamber. The Princess Lucretia too heard the sounds; she was lying on a sofa in her
       boudoir reading the Inferno and immediately mustered her garrison in the form of a French
       maid, and gave directions that no one should be admitted. Both the Marquess, and his intended
       bride, felt that a crisis was at hand, and resolved to participate in no scenes.  
  The ringing ceased; there was again silence. Then there was another ring; a very short,
       hasty, and violent pull; followed by some slamming of doors. The servants, who were all on
       the alert and had advantages of hearing and observation denied to their secluded master,
       caught a glimpse of Mr. Rigby endeavouring gently to draw back into her apartments Madame
       Colonna, furious amid his deprecatory exclamations.  
   you—you are quite wrong—you are indeed—it is a complete misapprehension—I will
       explain everything. I entreat—I implore—whatever you like—just what you please—only
       listen."  
  Then the lady with a mantling visage and flashing eye, violently closing the door, was
       again lost to their sight. A few minutes after, there was a more moderate ring and Mr. Rigby
       coming out of the apartments, with his cravat a little out of order as if he had had a
       violent shaking, met the servant who would have entered.  
  "Order Madame Colonna's travelling carriage," he exclaimed in a loud voice, "and send
       Mademoiselle Conrad here directly. I don't think the fellow hears me," added Mr. Rigby and
       following the servant, he added in a low tone and with a significant glance, "no travelling
       carriage; no Mademoiselle Conrad; order the britska round as usual."  
   a beautiful morning dress, and leaning on the arm of Mr. Rigby she descended
       the stairs, and was handed into her carriage by that gentleman, who seating himself by her
       side, ordered them to drive to Richmond.  
  Lord Monmouth having been informed that all was calm, and that Madame Colonna attended by
       Mr. Rigby, had gone to Richmond, ordered his carriage, and accompanied by Lucretia and Lucian
       Gay, departed immediately for Blackwall, where in white bait, a quiet bottle of claret, the
       society of his agreeable friends, and the contemplation of the passing steamers, he found a
       mild distraction and an amusing repose.  
   minutes to collect himself, at the end of which he made the Princess several
       announcements of intended arrangements, all of which pleased her mightily, though they were
       so inconsistent with each other, that if she had not been a woman in a passion, she must have
       detected that Rigby was lying. He assured her almost in the same breath, that she was never
       to be separated from them, and that she was to have any establishment in any country she
       liked. He talked wildly of equipages, diamonds, shawls, opera boxes; and while her mind was
       bewildered with these dazzling objects, he with intrepid gravity consulted her as to the
       exact amount she would like to have apportioned, independent of her general revenue, for the
       purposes of charity.  
   so, but in consequence of her lengthened interview with Rigby, his Lordship had
       departed for Richmond with Lucretia, where he hoped that Madame Colonna and Mr. Rigby would
       join him. So it ended, with a morning drive and suburban dinner; Rigby, after what he had
       gone through, finding no difficulty in accounting for the other guests not being present, and
       bringing home Madame Colonna in the evening, at times almost as gay and good-tempered as
       usual, and almost oblivious of her disappointment.  
  When the Marquess met Madame Colonna, he embraced her with great courtliness, and from that
       time consulted her on every arrangement. He took a very early occasion of presenting her with
       a diamond necklace of great value. The Marquess was fond of making presents to persons to
       whom he thought he had not behaved very well, and who yet spared him scenes.  
   party was very select, but brilliant as the diamond necklace: a royal Duke and
       Duchess, Lady St. Julians, and a few others. Mr. Ormsby presented the bride with a bouquet of
       precious stones, and Lord Eskdale with a French fan in a diamond frame. It was a fine day;
       Lord Monmouth, calm as if he were winning the St. Leger; Lucretia, universally recognized as
       a beauty; all the guests gay, the Princess Colonna especially.  
  The travelling-carriage is at the door which is to bear the happy pair away. Madame Colonna
       embraces Lucretia; the Marquess gives a grand bow: they are gone. The guests remain awhile. A
       Prince of the blood will propose a toast; there is another glass of champagne quaffed,
       another ortolan devoured; and then they rise and disperse. Madame Colonna leaves them with
       Lady St. Julians, whose guest for a while she is to become. And in a few minutes their host
       is alone.  
   well-stored, classically adorned, and opened on a beautiful lawn. Rigby threw
       himself into an ample chair, crossed his legs, and resting his head on his arm, apparently
       fell into deep contemplation.  
  He had some cause for reflection, and though we did once venture to affirm that Rigby never
       either thought or felt, this perhaps may be the exception that proves the rule.  
  He could scarcely refrain from pondering over the strange event which he had witnessed, and
       had assisted.  
   up his pen and thus made the necessary entry.  
  "   Married, second time, August 3rd.   1837,   The Princess Lucretia Colonna,
        daughter of Prince Paul Colonna, born at Rome, February   16   th.   1819.  
  That was what Mr. Rigby called "a great fact." There was not a peerage compiler in England
       who had that date save himself.  
   to any extent in England in his profession, and probably no where else,
       appointed him, to Villebecque's infinite satisfaction, Intendant of his household with a
       considerable salary, while Flora still lived with her kind step-father.  
  
  CHAPTER VII.  
   tone of studious life around, rendered an University for him a genial
       residence. There is a moment in life, when the pride and thirst of knowledge seem to absorb
       our being, and so it happened now to Coningsby, who felt each day stronger in his
       intellectual resources, and each day more anxious and avid to increase them. The habits of
       public discussion fostered by the Debating Society were also for Coningsby no inconsiderable
       tie to the University. This was the arena in which he felt himself at home. The promise of
       his Eton days was here fulfilled. And while his friends listened to his sustained argument or
       his impassioned declamation; the prompt reply or the apt retort; they looked forward with
       pride through the vista of years to the time when the hero of the youthful Club should
       convince or dazzle in the senate. It is probable then that he would have remained at
       Cambridge with slight intervals until he had taken his degree, had not circumstances occurred
       which gave altogether a new turn to his thoughts.  
   Lord Monmouth a letter of congratulation, full of feeling and ingenuousness,
       and which, while it much pleased the person to whom it was addressed, unintentionally
       convinced him that Coningsby had never received his original communication. Lord Monmouth
       spoke to Villebecque, who could throw sufficient light upon the subject, but it was never
       mentioned to Lady Monmouth. The Marquess was a man who always found out everything, and
       enjoyed the secret.  
  Rather more than a year after the marriage, when Coningsby had completed his twenty-first
       year, the year which he had passed so quietly at Cambridge, he received a letter from his
       grandfather, informing him that after a variety of movements Lady Monmouth and himself were
       established in Paris for the season, and desiring that he would not fail to come over as soon
       as was practicable, and pay them as long a visit as the regulations of the University would
       permit. So, at the close of the December term, Coningsby quitted Cambridge for Paris.  
   exact copy of that portrait which had so greatly excited his attention when at
       Millbank! This was a mysterious and singularly perplexing incident. It greatly agitated him.
       He was alone in the room when he made the discovery. When he had recovered himself, he sealed
       up the contents of the box, with the exception of his mother's letters and the miniature,
       which he took away with him, and then re-delivered it to his banker for custody until his
       return.  
  Coningsby found Lord and Lady Monmouth in a splendid hotel in the Faubourg St. Honoré, near
       the English embassy. His grandfather looked at him with marked attention, and received him
       with evident satisfaction. Indeed Lord Monmouth was greatly pleased that Harry had come to
       Paris; it was the University of the World, where everybody should graduate. Paris and London
       ought to be the great objects of all travellers; the rest was mere landscape.  
   for a short time had apparently removed or modified the aversion, the manner of
       the lady when Coningsby was ushered into her boudoir, resplendent with all that Parisian
       taste and luxury could devise, was characterized by that frigid politeness which had preceded
       the days of their more genial acquaintance. If the manner of Lucretia were the same as before
       her marriage, a considerable change might however be observed in her appearance. Her fine
       form had become more developed; while her dress, that she once totally neglected, was
       elaborate and gorgeous, and of the last mode. Lucretia was the fashion at Paris; a great
       lady, greatly admired. A guest under such a roof however, Coningsby was at once launched into
       the most brilliant circles of Parisian society, which he found fascinating.  
   the manner in which a French lady receives her guests! She unites graceful
       repose and unaffected dignity, with the most amiable regard for others. She sees every one;
       she speaks to every one; she sees them at the right moment; she says the right thing. It is
       utterly impossible to detect any difference in the position of her guests by the spirit in
       which she welcomes them. There is, indeed, throughout every circle of Parisian society, from
       the "château" to the "cabaret," a sincere homage to intellect; and this without any maudlin
       sentiment. None sooner than the Parisians can draw the line between factitious notoriety and
       honest fame; or sooner distinguish between the counterfeit celebrity and the standard
       reputation. In England we too often alternate between a supercilious neglect of genius and a
       rhapsodical pursuit of quacks. In England, when a new character appears in our circles, the
       first question always is, "Who is he?" In France it is, "What is he?" In England, "How much
       a-year?" In France, "What has he done?"  
  
  CHAPTER VIII.  
  About a week after Coningsby's arrival in Paris, as he was sauntering on the soft
       and sunny Boulevards, soft and sunny though Christmas, he met Sidonia.  
  "So you are here?" said Sidonia. "Turn now with me, for I see you are only lounging, and
       tell me when you came, where you are, and what you have done since we parted. I have been
       here myself but a few days."  
   was at Paris, and that Coningsby was his guest.  
  "I am sorry you cannot come to me," he remarked; "I would have shown you every body and
       every thing. But we shall meet often."  
  "I have already seen many remarkable things," said Coningsby; "and met many celebrated
       persons. Nothing more strikes me in this brilliant city than the tone of its society, so much
       higher than our own. What an absence of petty personalities! How much conversation, and how
       little gossip! Yet no where is there less pedantry. All women here as agreeable as is the
       remarkable privilege in London of some half dozen. Men too, and great men, develope their
       minds. A great man in England on the contrary is generally the dullest dog in company. And
       yet how piteous to think that so fair a civilisation should be in such imminent peril."  
   than that of France. We must not be misled by the agitated surface of this
       country. The foundations of its order are deep and sure. Learn to understand France. France
       is a Kingdom with a Republic for its capital. It has been always so, for centuries. From the
       days of the League to the days of the Sections, to the days of 1830. It is still France,
       little changed; and only more national; for it is less Frank and more Gallic; as England has
       become less Norman and more Saxon."  
  "And it is your opinion then, that the present King may maintain himself?"  
  "Every movement in this country, however apparently discordant, seems to tend to that
       inevitable end. He would not be on the throne if the nature of things had not demanded his
       presence. The Kingdom of France required a Monarch; the Republic of Paris required a
       Dictator. He comprised in his person both qualifications; lineage and intellect; blood for
       the provinces, brains for the city."  
   eagerly, "what is he? This Prince of whom one hears in all countries at all
       hours; on whose existence we are told the tranquillity, almost the civilisation, of Europe
       depends, yet of whom we receive accounts so conflicting, so contradictory; tell me, you who
       can tell me, tell me what he is?"  
  Sidonia smiled at his earnestness. "I have a creed of mine own," he remarked, "that the
       great characters of antiquity are at rare epochs re-produced for our wonder, or our guidance.
       Nature, wearied with mediocrity, pours the warm metal into an heroic mould. When
       circumstances at length placed me in the presence of the King of France, I recognised—
          Ulysses   !"  
  "But is there no danger," resumed Coningsby, after the pause of a few moments, "that the
       Republic of Paris may absorb the Kingdom of France?"  
   of free laws and manners, and of a widely diffused intelligence. Political
       compromises are not to be tolerated except at periods of rude transition. An educated nation
       recoils from the imperfect vicariate of what is called a representative government. Your
       House of Commons, that has absorbed all other powers in the State, will in all probability
       fall more rapidly than it rose. Public opinion has a more direct, a more comprehensive, a
       more efficient organ for its utterance, than a body of men sectionally chosen. The Printing
       Press is a political element unknown to classic or feudal times. It absorbs in a great degree
       the duties of the Sovereign, the Priest, the Parliament; it controls, it educates, it
       discusses. That public opinion when it acts would appear in the form of one who has no class
       interests. In an enlightened age the Monarch on the throne, free from the vulgar prejudices
       and the corrupt interests of the subject, becomes again divine!"  
   Coningsby was about to quit his companion, when Sidonia said:  
  "I am only going to step over to the Rue Tronchet to say a few words to a friend of mine,
       M. P—s. I shall not detain you five minutes; and you should know him, for he has some capital
       pictures, and a collection of Limoges ware that is the despair of the dilettanti."  
   and unnoticed, for the lady's back was to the door; yet Coningsby advancing in
       an angular direction, obtained nearly a complete view of her countenance. It was upraised,
       gazing on the picture with an expression of delight; the bonnet thrown back, while the large
       sable cloak of the gazer had fallen partly off. The countenance was more beautiful than the
       beautiful picture. Those glowing shades of the gallery to which love, and genius, and
       devotion had lent their inspiration, seemed without life and lustre by the radiant and
       expressive presence which Coningsby now beheld.  
  The finely arched brow was a little elevated, the soft dark eyes were fully opened, the
       nostril of the delicate nose slightly dilated, the small, yet rich, full, lips just parted;
       and over the clear transparent visage there played a vivid glance of gratified
       intelligence.  
   be called tall; a quality so rare, that even skilful dancers do not often
       possess it, was hers; that elastic gait that is so winning, and so often denotes the gaiety
       and quickness of the spirit.  
  The fair object of his observation had advanced into other chambers, and as soon as it was
       becoming, Coningsby followed her. She had joined a lady and gentleman, who were examining an
       ancient carving in ivory. The gentleman was middle-aged and portly; the elder lady tall and
       elegant, and with traces of interesting beauty. Coningsby heard her speak; the words were
       English, but the accent not of a native.  
   of the rare and fanciful objects that surrounded him, yet compelled, from the
       fear of seeming obtrusive, for some minutes to remain. Then he too returned to the gallery,
       and just as he had gained its end, he saw the portly gentleman in the distance shaking hands
       with Sidonia, the ladies apparently expressing their thanks and gratification to M. P—s, and
       then all vanishing by the door through which Coningsby had originally entered.  
  "What a beautiful countrywoman of yours!" said M. P—s, as Coningsby approached him.  
  "Is she my countrywoman! I am glad to hear it; I have been admiring her," he replied.  
  "Yes," said M. P—s, "it is Sir Wallinger; one of your deputies; don't you know him?"  
  "Sir Wallinger!" said Coningsby, "no, I have not that honour." He looked at Sidonia.  
   I know him. He married a Spaniard. That is not his daughter but his niece; the
       child of his wife's sister. It is not easy to find any one more beautiful."  
  END OF VOL. II.  
 / 
  
  
  
  VOL. III.  
  BOOK VI.  
  CHAPTER I.  
  The knowledge that Sidonia was at Paris greatly agitated Lady Monmouth. She
       received the intimation indeed from Coningsby at dinner with sufficient art to conceal her
       emotion. Lord Monmouth himself was quite pleased at the announcement. Sidonia was his
       especial favourite; he knew so much, had such an excellent judgment, and was so rich. He had
       always
        /  something to tell you, was the best man in the world to bet on, and never wanted
       anything. A perfect character according to the Monmouth ethics.  
  In the evening of the day that Coningsby met Sidonia, Lady Monmouth made a little visit to
       the charming Duchess de G—t who was "at home" every other night in her pretty hotel, with its
       embroidered white satin draperies, its fine old cabinets, and ancestral portraits of famous
       name, brave marshals and bright princesses of the olden time, on its walls. These receptions
       without form, yet full of elegance, are what English "at homes" were before the continental
       war, though now, by a curious perversion of terms, the easy domestic title distinguishes in
       England a formally prepared and elaborately collected assembly, in which everything and every
       person are careful to be as little "homely" as possible. In France, on the contrary, 'tis on
       these occasions, and in this manner, that society carries on that degree and kind of
       intercourse which in England we attempt awkwardly to maintain by the medium
        /  of that unpopular species of visitation styled a morning call; which all complain that
       they have either to make or to endure.  
  Nowhere was this species of reception more happily conducted than at the Duchess de G—t.
       The rooms though small, decorated with taste, brightly illumined; a handsome and gracious
       hostess, the Duke the very pearl of gentlemen, and sons and daughters worthy of such parents.
       Every moment some one came in, and some one went away. In your way from a dinner to a ball,
       you stopped to exchange agreeable "on dits." It seemed that every woman was pretty, every man
       a wit. Sure you were to find yourself surrounded by celebrities, and men were welcomed there
       if they were clever before they were famous, which showed it was a house that regarded
       intellect, and did not seek merely to gratify its vanity by being surrounded by the
       distinguished.  
  Enveloped in a rich Indian shawl and leaning back on a sofa, Lady Monmouth was engaged in
       conversation with the courtly and classic Count M—é, when on casually turning her head, she
        /  observed entering the saloon, Sidonia. She just caught his form bowing to the Duchess,
       and instantly turned her head and replunged into her conversation with increased interest.
       Lady Monmouth was a person who had the power of seeing all about her, everything and
       everybody, without appearing to look. She was conscious that Sidonia was approaching her
       neighbourhood. Her heart beat in tumult; she dreaded to catch the eye of that very individual
       whom she was so anxious to meet. He was advancing towards the sofa. Instinctively Lady
       Monmouth turned from the Count, and began speaking earnestly to her other neighbour, a young
       daughter of the house, innocent and beautiful, not yet quite fledged, trying her wings in
       society under the maternal eye. She was surprised by the extreme interest which her grand
       neighbour suddenly took in all her pursuits, her studies, her daily walks in the Bois de
       Boulogne. Sidonia as the Marchioness had anticipated, had now reached the sofa. But no, it
       was to the Count and not to Lady Monmouth that he was advancing; and they were immediately
       engaged in conversation.
        /  After some little time when she had become accustomed to his voice, and found her own
       heart throbbing with less violence, Lucretia turned again, as if by accident to the Count,
       and met the glance of Sidonia. She meant to have received him with haughtiness, but her
       self-command deserted her; and slightly rising from the sofa, she welcomed him with a
       countenance of extreme pallor and with some awkwardness.  
  His manner was such as might have assisted her, even had she been more troubled. It was
       marked by a degree of respectful friendliness. He expressed without reserve his pleasure at
       meeting her again; inquired much how she had passed her time since they last parted; asked
       more than once after the Marquess. The Count moved away; Sidonia took his seat. His ease and
       homage combined very greatly relieved her. She expressed to him how kind her Lord would
       consider his society, for the Marquess had suffered in health since Sidonia last saw him. His
       periodical gout had left him, which made him ill and nervous. The Marquess received his
       friends at dinner every day.
        /  Sidonia particularly amiable, offered himself as a guest for the following one.  
  "And do you go to the great ball to-morrow?" inquired Lucretia, delighted with all that had
       occurred.  
  "I always go to their balls," said Sidonia, "I have promised."  
  There was a momentary pause; Lucretia, happier than she had been for a long time, her face
       a little flushed, and truly in a secret tumult of sweet thoughts, remembered she had been
       long there, and offering her hand to Sidonia, bade him adieu until to-morrow. While he, as
       was his custom, soon repaired to the refined circle of the Countess de C—s—I—ne a lady, whose
       manners he always mentioned as his fair ideal, and whose house was his favourite haunt.  
  Before to-morrow comes, a word or two respecting two other characters of this history
       connected with the family of Lord Monmouth. And first of Flora. "La Petite" was neither very
       well nor very happy. Her hereditary disease developed itself; gradually, but in a manner
        /  alarming to those who loved her. She was very delicate, and suffered so much from the
       weakness of her chest, that she was obliged to relinquish singing. This was really the only
       tie between her and the Marchioness, who without being a petty tyrant, treated her often with
       unfeeling haughtiness. She was therefore now rarely seen in the chambers of the great. In her
       own apartments she found indeed some distraction in music, for which she had a natural
       predisposition, but this was a pursuit that only fed the morbid passion of her tender soul.
       Alone, listening only to sweet sounds, or indulging in soft dreams that never could be
       realized, her existence glided away like a vision, and she seemed to become every day more
       fair and fragile. Alas! hers was the sad and mystic destiny to love one whom she never met,
       and by whom if she met him, she would scarcely perhaps be recognised. Yet in that passion,
       fanciful, almost ideal, her life was absorbed, nor for her did the world contain an
       existence, a thought, a sensation, beyond those that sprang from the image of the noble youth
       who had sympathized with her in her sorrows,
        /  and had softened the hard fortunes of dependence by his generous sensibility. Happy
       that with many mortifications, it was still her lot to live under the roof of one who bore
       his name, and in whose veins flowed the same blood! She felt indeed for the Marquess, whom
       she so rarely saw, and from whom she had never received much notice, prompted it would seem
       by her fantastic passion, a degree of reverence, almost of affection, which seemed
       occasionally even to herself as something inexplicable and without reason.  
  As for her fond stepfather, M. Villebecque, the world fared very differently with him. His
       lively and enterprising genius, his ready and multiform talents, and his temper which defied
       disturbance, had made their way. He had become the very right hand of Lord Monmouth; his only
       counsellor, his only confidant; his secret agent; the minister of his will. And well did
       Villebecque deserve this trust, and ably did he maintain himself in the difficult position
       which he achieved. There was nothing which Villebecque did not know, nothing which he could
       not do, especially at Paris. He was master
        /  of his subject; in all things the secret of success, and without which however they may
       from accident dazzle the world, the statesman, the orator, the author, all alike feel the
       damning consciousness of being charlatans.  
  Coningsby had made a visit to M. Villebecque and Flora the day after his arrival. It was a
       recollection and a courtesy that evidently greatly gratified them. Villebecque talked very
       much and amusingly; and Flora, whom Coningsby frequently addressed, very little, though she
       listened with great earnestness. Coningsby told her that he thought from all he heard she was
       too much alone, and counselled her to gaiety. But nature that had made her mild, had denied
       her that constitutional liveliness of being which is the graceful property of French women.
       She was a lilly of the valley, that loved seclusion, and the tranquillity of virgin glades.
       Almost every day as he passed their entresol, Coningsby would look into Villebecque's
       apartments for a moment to ask after Flora.  
  
  CHAPTER II.  
  Sidonia was to dine at Lord Monmouth's the day after he met Lucretia, and
       afterwards they were all to meet at a ball much talked of, and to which invitations were much
       sought; and which was to be given that evening by the Baroness S. de R—d.  
   would gain a delightful beverage, and the French for the first time in their
       lives would dine off hot plates. An unanswerable instance of the advantages of commercial
       reciprocity!  
  The guests at Lord Monmouth's to-day were chiefly Carlists, individuals bearing illustrious
       names, that animate the page of history, and are indissolubly bound up with the glorious
       annals of their great country. They are the phantoms of a past, but real aristocracy; an
       aristocracy that was founded on an intelligible principle; which claimed great privileges for
       great purposes; whose hereditary duties were such, that their possessors were perpetually in
       the eye of the nation, and who maintained and, in a certain point of view, justified their
       pre-eminence by constant illustration.  
   imagination; and whose magnificent and wanton luxury had developed his own
       predisposition for boundless enjoyment. Soubise and his suppers; his cutlets and his
       mistresses; the profuse and embarrassed De Laraguais, who sighed for "entire ruin," as for a
       strange luxury, which perpetually eluded his grasp; these were the heroes of the olden time
       that Lord Monmouth worshipped; the wisdom of our ancestors which he appreciated; and he
       turned to their recollection for relief from the vulgar prudence of the degenerate days on
       which he had fallen: days when nobles must be richer than other men, or they cease to have
       any distinction.  
   was the triumph of mien over mere beauty of countenance.  
   great occasion, is not easily equalled. In London there is not the variety of
       guests; nor the same size and splendour of saloons. Our houses are too small for
       reception.  
  Coningsby, who had stolen away from his grandfather's before the rest of the guests, was
       delighted with the novelty of the splendid scene. He had been in Paris long enough to make
       some acquaintances, and mostly with celebrated personages. In his long-fruitless endeavour to
       enter the saloon in which they danced, he found himself hustled against the illustrious Baron
       von H—t, whom he had sat next to at dinner a few days before at Count M—é's.  
  "It is more difficult than cutting through the Isthmus of Panama, Baron," said Coningsby,
       alluding to a past conversation.  
  "Infinitely," replied M. de H., smiling; "for I would undertake to cut through the Isthmus,
       and I cannot engage that I shall enter this ball-room."  
   How vivid the flowers! To sounds of stirring melody, beautiful beings move with
       grace. Grace indeed is beauty in action.  
  Here where all are fair and everything is attractive, his eye is suddenly arrested by one
       object— a form of surpassing grace among the graceful, among the beauteous, a countenance of
       unrivalled beauty.  
  She was young among the youthful; a face of sunshine amid all that artificial light; her
       head placed upon her finely moulded shoulders with a queen-like grace; a coronet of white
       roses on her dark brown hair; her only ornament. It was the beauty of the picture
       gallery.  
  The eye of Coningsby never quitted her. When the dance ceased, he had an opportunity of
       seeing her nearer. He met her walking with her cavalier, and he was conscious that she
       observed him. Finally, he remarked that she resumed a seat next to the lady, whom he had
       mistaken for her mother, but had afterwards understood to be Lady Wallinger.  
   Monmouth, who moved on towards the ballroom. Soon after this, Sidonia arrived;
       he came in with the still handsome and ever courteous Duke D—s. Observing Coningsby, he
       stopped to present him to the Duke. While thus conversing, the Duke, who is very fond of the
       English, observed: "See, here is your beautiful countrywoman, that all the world are talking
       of. That is her uncle. He brings to me letters from one of your lords, whose name I cannot
       recollect."  
   said aloud: "Coningsby, Miss Millbank says that you have forgotten her."  
  Coningsby started, advanced, coloured a little, could not conceal his surprise. The lady
       too though more prepared, was not without confusion, and for an instant looked down.
       Coningsby recalled at that moment the long dark eye-lashes and the beautiful, bashful,
       countenance that had so charmed him at Millbank; but two years had otherwise effected a
       wonderful change in the sister of his school-day friend, and transformed the silent,
       embarrassed girl into a woman of surpassing beauty and of the most graceful and impressive
       mien.  
  "It is not surprising that Mr. Coningsby should not recollect my niece," said Sir Joseph
       addressing Sidonia, and wishing to cover their mutual embarrassment; "but it is impossible
       for her or for any one connected with her, not to be anxious at all times to express to him
       our sanse of what we all owe him."  
   heard last from Millbank; how her father was; also, how was her brother. Sidonia
       made an observation to Sir Joseph on a passer-by, and then himself moved on; Coningsby
       accompanying his new friends in a contrary direction, to the refreshment room to which they
       were proceeding.  
  "And you have passed a winter at Rome," said Coningsby. "How I envy you! I feel that I
       shall never be able to travel!"  
  "And why not?"  
  "Life has become so stirring, that there is ever some great cause that keeps one at
       home."  
  "Life, on the contrary, so swift, that all may see now that of which they once could only
       read."  
  "The gold and silver sides of the shield," said Coningsby with a smile.  
  "And you, like a good knight will maintain your own."  
  "No, I would follow yours."  
  "You have not heard lately from Oswald?"  
   correspondents as we are; I only wish we could meet."  
  "You will soon; but he is such a devotee of Oxford; quite a monk; and you, too, Mr.
       Coningsby are much occupied."  
  "Yes, and at the same time as Millbank. I was in hopes when I once paid you a visit, I
       might have found your brother."  
  "But that was such a rapid visit," said Miss Millbank.  
  "I always remember it with delight," said Coningsby.  
  "You were willing to be pleased; but Millbank notwithstanding Rome commands my affections,
       and in spite of this surrounding splendour, I could have wished to have passed my Christmas
       in Lancashire.  
  "Mr. Millbank has lately purchased a very beautiful place in the county. I became
       acquainted with Hellingsley when staying at my grandfather's."  
   there; and Oswald I am sure could never be tempted to quit Millbank. You know
       what enthusiastic ideas he has of his order?"  
  "Like all his ideas; sound, and high, and pure. I always duly appreciated your brother's
       great abilities, and what is far more important, his lofty mind. When I recollect our Eton
       days, I cannot understand how more than two years have passed away without our being
       together. I am sure the fault is mine. I might now have been at Oxford instead of Paris. And,
       yet," added Coningsby, "that would have been a sad mistake, since I should not have had the
       happiness of being here."  
  "Oh, yes, that would have been a sad mistake," said Miss Millbank.  
  "Edith," said Sir Joseph, rejoining his niece, from whom he had been momentarily separated,
       "Edith, that is Monsieur Thiers."  
   Opera House than in his box; he delighted too in the society of   εταραι  
       ; Aspasia was his heroine. Obliged to appear much in what is esteemed pure society, he
       cultivated the acquaintance of clever women because they interested him; but in such saloons
       his feminine acquaintances were merely psychological. No lady could accuse him of trifling
       with her feelings, however decided might be his predilection for her conversation. He yielded
       at once to an admirer; never trespassed by any chance into the domain of sentiment; never
       broke by any accident of blunder into the irregular paces of flirtation; was a man who
       notoriously would never diminish by marriage the purity of his race; and one who always
       maintained that passion and polished life were quite incompatible. He liked the drawing-room,
       and he liked the desart, but he would not consent that either should trench on their mutual
       privileges.  
   Now they met again and she was the Marchioness of Monmouth, a very great lady,
       very much admired, and followed, and courted, and very powerful. It is our great moralist who
       tells us in the immortal page that an affair of gallantry with a great lady is more
       delightful than with ladies of a lower degree. In this he contradicts the good old ballad;
       but certain it is, that Dr. Johnson announced to Boswell, "Sir, in the case of a Countess the
       imagination is more excited."  
   Anthony and the actress Cytheris in their chariot drawn by tigers! What a
       character would he paint of that Flora who gave her gardens to the Roman people! It would
       draw tears to your eyes. No man was ever so learned in the female manners of the last
       centuries of polytheism as Sidonia. You would have supposed that he had devoted his studies
       peculiarly to that period, if you had not chanced to draw him to the Italian middle ages. And
       even those startling revelations were almost eclipsed by his anecdotes of the Court of Henry
       III. of France, with every character of which he was as familiar as with the brilliant groups
       that at this moment filled the saloons of Madame de R—d.  
  
  CHAPTER III.  
   bore the features of the senior Millbank. A beautiful countenance that was
       alternately the face in the mysterious picture, and then that of Edith, haunted him under all
       circumstances. He woke little refreshed; restless and yet sensible of some secret joy.  
  He woke to think of her of whom he had dreamed. The light had dawned on his soul. Coningsby
       loved.  
  Ah! what is that ambition, that haunts our youth—that thirst for power or that lust of
       fame, that forces us from obscurity into the sunblaze of the world—what are these sentiments
       so high, so vehement, so ennobling! They vanish, and in an instant, before the glance of a
       woman!  
  Coningsby had scarcely quitted her side the preceding eve. He hung upon the accents of that
       clear sweet voice, and sought with tremulous fascination, the gleaming splendour of those
       soft dark eyes. And now he sat in his chamber with his eyes fixed upon vacancy. All thoughts
       and feelings, pursuits, desires, life, merge in one absorbing sentiment.  
  It is impossible to exist without seeing her again, and instantly. He had requested and
       gained permission to call on Lady Wallinger; he would not lose a moment in availing himself
       of it. As early as was tolerably decorous, and before in all probability they could quit
       their hotel, Coningsby repaired to the Rue de Rivoli to pay his respects to his new
       friends.  
  As he walked along, he indulged in fanciful speculations which connected Edith and the
       mysterious portrait of his mother. He felt himself as it were near the fulfilment of some
       fate, and on the threshold of some critical discovery. He recalled the impatient, even
       alarmed, expressions of Rigby at Montem six years ago, when he proposed to invite young
       Millbank to his grandfather's dinner; the vindictive feud that existed between the two
       families; and for which political opinion, or even party passion could not satisfactorily
       account; and he reasoned himself into a conviction, that the solution of many perplexities
       was at hand, and that all would be consummated to the satisfaction of every one, by his
       unexpected but inevitable agency.  
   the Treasury; and was not afraid of giving an unpopular one to serve his
       friends. He was not like that distinguished Liberal, who after dining with the late Whig
       Premier expressed his gratification and his gratitude by assuring his Lordship that he might
       count on his support on all popular questions.  
  "I want men who will support the government on all unpopular questions," replied the witty
       statesman.  
   Baronet should be cut, and in due time he figured Sir Joseph.  
  A Spanish gentleman, of very ample means, and of a very good Catalan family, flying during
       a political convulsion to England, arrived with his two daughters at Liverpool, and bore
       letters of introduction to the house of Wallinger. Some little time after this, by one of
       those stormy vicissitudes of political fortune, of late years not unusual in the Peninsula,
       he returned to his native country, and left his children and the management of that portion
       of his fortune that he had succeeded in bringing with him, under the guardianship of the
       father of the present Sir Joseph. This gentleman was about again to become an exile, when he
       met with an untimely end in one of those terrible tumults of which Barcelona is the frequent
       scene.  
   though they had no heir, the union had been one of great felicity. Sir Joseph
       was proud of his wife; he secretly considered himself, though his "tone" was as liberal and
       independent as in old days, to be on the threshold of aristocracy, and was conscious that
       Lady Wallinger played her part not unworthily in the elevated circles in which they now
       frequently found themselves. Sir Joseph was fond of great people; and not averse to travel;
       because bearing a title and being a member of the British Parliament, and always moving with
       the appendages of wealth, servants, and carriages, and couriers, and fortified with no lack
       of letters from the Foreign Office, he was everywhere acknowledged and received, and treated
       as a personage; was invited to court-balls, dined with ambassadors, and found himself and his
       lady at every festival of distinction.  
   equal to those occasions. Without losing the native simplicity of her character,
       which sprang from the heart, and which the strong and original bent of her father's mind had
       fostered, she had imbibed all the refinement and facility of the polished circles in which
       she moved. She had a clear head, a fine taste, and a generous spirit; had received so much
       admiration, that, though by no means insensible to homage, her heart was free; was strongly
       attached to her family; and notwithstanding all the splendour of Rome and the brilliancy of
       Paris, her thoughts were often in her Saxon valley, amid the green hills and busy factories
       of Millbank.  
   Lord John so two years ago, and between themselves Lord John was of the same
       opinion. The present position of the Whigs was the necessary fate of all progressive parties;
       could not see exactly how it would end; thought sometimes it must end in a fusion of parties;
       but could not well see how that could be brought about, at least at present. For his part,
       should be very happy to witness an union of the best men of all parties, for the preservation
       of peace and order, without any reference to any particular opinions. And, in that sense of
       the word, it was not at all impossible he might find it his duty some day to support a
       Conservative government.  
   opinions to uphold it; and that governments for the preservation of peace and
       order, and nothing else, had better be sought in China, or among the Austrians, the Chinese
       of Europe. As for Conservative government, the natural question was, What do you mean to
       conserve? Do you mean to conserve things or only names, realities or merely appearances? Or,
       do you mean to continue the system commenced in 1834, and, with a hypocritical reverence for
       the principles, and a superstitious adhesion to the forms, of the old exclusive constitution,
       carry on your policy by latitudinarian practice?  
  Sir Joseph stared; it was the first time that any inkling of the views of the New
       Generation had caught his ear. They were strange and unaccustomed accents. He was extremely
       perplexed; could by no means make out what his companion was driving at; at length, with a
       rather knowing smile, expressive as much of compassion as comprehension, he remarked:  
  "Ah! I see; you are a regular Orangeman."  
  "I look upon an Orangeman," said Coningsby, "as a pure Whig; the only professor and
       practiser of unadulterated Whiggism."  
  This was too much for Sir Joseph, whose political knowledge did not reach much further back
       than the ministry of the Mediocrities; hardly touched the times of the Corresponding Society.
       But he was a cautious man, and never replied in haste. He was about feeling his way, when he
       experienced the golden advantage of gaining time, for the ladies entered.  
   an hour, passed away, and Coningsby still found some excuse not to depart. It
       seemed that on this morning they were about to make an expedition into the antique city of
       Paris to visit some old hotels which retained their character; especially they had heard much
       of the hotel of the Archbishop of Sens, with its fortified courtyard. Coningsby expressed
       great interest in the subject, and showed some knowledge. Sir Joseph invited him to join the
       party, which of all things in the world was what he most desired.  
  
  CHAPTER IV.  
   Millbank; he was bound to communicate in person this evidence of his friend's
       existence; and when he had to reply to the letter, he must necessarily inquire whether his
       friend's relatives had any message to transmit to him. These however were only slight
       advantages. What assisted Coningsby in his plans and wishes was the great pleasure which
       Sidonia, with whom he passed a great deal of his time, took in the society of the Wallingers
       and their niece. Sidonia presented Lady Wallinger with his opera-box during her stay at
       Paris; invited them very frequently to his agreeable dinner parties; and announced his
       determination to give a ball, which Lady Wallinger esteemed a delicate attention to Edith;
       while Lady Monmouth flattered herself that the festival sprang from the desire she had
       expressed of seeing the celebrated hotel of Sidonia to advantage.  
   presence gave her pleasure, and though she had many admirers and had an airy
       graciousness for all of them, Coningsby sometimes indulged the exquisite suspicion that there
       was a flattering distinction in her carriage to himself. Under the influence of these
       feelings, he began daily to be more conscious that separation would be an intolerable
       calamity; he began to meditate upon the feasibility of keeping a half term, and of postponing
       his departure to Cambridge to a period nearer the time when Edith would probably return to
       England.  
   of cold-catching, and would eat his good dinners instead of insisting on his
       eating their bad ones.  
  "But Monsieur Sidonia's cook is a gem, they say," observed an attaché of an Embassy.  
  "I have no doubt of it: Sidonia is a man of sense, almost the only man of sense I know. I
       never caught him tripping. He never makes a false move. Sidonia is exactly the sort of man I
       like; you know you cannot deceive him, and that he does not want to deceive you. I wish he
       liked a rubber more. Then he would be perfect."  
  "They say he is going to be married," said the Attaché.  
  "Poh!" said Lord Monmouth.  
  "Married?" exclaimed Lady Monmouth.  
  "To whom?"  
  "To your beautiful country woman; 'la belle Anglaise' that all the world talks of," said
       the Attaché.  
  "And who may she be, pray?" said the Marquess. "I have so many beautiful country
       women."  
  "Mademoiselle Millbank," said the Attaché.  
  "Millbank," said the Marquess with a lowering brow. "There are so many Millbanks. Do you
       know what Millbank this is, Harry?" he inquired of his grandson, who had listened to the
       conversation with a rather embarrassed, and even agitated spirit.  
  "What, sir—yes—Millbank?" said Coningsby.  
  "I say, do you know who this Millbank is?"  
  "Oh! Miss Millbank: yes, I believe, that is I know a daughter of the—the gentleman who
       purchased some property near you."  
  "Oh! that fellow! Has he got a daughter here!"  
  "The most beautiful girl in Paris," said the Attaché.  
  "Lady Monmouth, have you seen this beauty?—That Sidonia is going to marry," he added with a
       fiendish laugh.  
  "I have seen the young lady," said Lady Monmouth; "but I had not heard that Monsieur
       Sidonia was about to marry her."  
  "Is she so very beautiful?" inquired another gentleman.  
  "Yes," said Lady Monmouth calm, but very pale.  
  "Poh!" said the Marquess again.  
  "I assure you that it is a fact," said the Attaché; "not at least an on-dit. I have it from
       a quarter that could not be well mistaken."  
  Behold a little snatch of ordinary dinner gossip that left a very painful impression on the
       minds of three individuals who were present.  
   touched his spleen. He took his wine freely, and, the usual consequence of that
       proceeding with Lord Monmouth, became silent and sullen. As for Lady Monmouth she had learnt
       that Sidonia whatever might be the result was paying very marked attention to another woman,
       for whom undoubtedly he was giving that very ball which she had flattered herself was a
       homage to her wishes, and for which she had projected a new dress of eclipsing splendour.  
   how was he ever to marry her, even if she cared for him? Oh! what a future of
       unbroken, continuous, interminable misery awaited him! Was there ever yet born a being with a
       destiny so dark and dismal! He was the most forlorn of men, utterly wretched! He had entirely
       mistaken his own character. He had no energy, no abilities, not a single eminent quality. All
       was over!  
  
  CHAPTER V.  
  It was fated that Lady Monmouth should not be present at that ball, the
       anticipation of which had occasioned her so much pleasure and some pangs.  
   still very powerful. He would have soon mastered the horses, had not one of the
       reins unhappily broke. The horses swerved; the Marquess kept his seat; Lucretia alarmed
       sprang up, the carriage was dashed against the trunk of a tree, and she was thrown out of it,
       at the very instant that one of the outriders had succeeded in heading the equipage, and
       checking the horses.  
  The Marchioness was senseless. Lord Monmouth had descended from the phaeton; several
       passengers had assembled; the door of a contiguous house was opened; there were offers of
       service, sympathy, inquiries, a babble of tongues, great confusion.  
  "Get surgeons; and send for her maid," said Lord Monmouth to one of his servants.  
   him. He recognized the livery. He instantly dismounted. Moving aside the crowd,
       he perceived Lady Monmouth senseless and prostrate, and her husband, without assistance,
       restraining the injudicious efforts of the byestanders.  
  "Let us carry her in, Lord Monmouth," said Sidonia, exchanging a recognition as he took
       Lucretia in his arms, and bore her into the dwelling that was at hand. Those who were
       standing at the door assisted him. The woman of the house and Lord Monmouth only were
       present.  
  "I would hope there is no fracture," said Sidonia, placing her on a sofa, "nor does it
       appear to me that the percussion of the head, though considerable, could have been fatally
       violent. I have caught her pulse. Keep her in a horizontal position and she will soon come to
       herself."  
   water. At this moment M. Villebecque and a surgeon entered the chamber.  
  "The brain cannot be affected with that pulse," said the surgeon; "there is no
       fracture."  
  "How pale she is!" said Lord Monmouth as if he were examining a picture.  
  "The colour seems to me to return," said Sidonia.  
  The surgeon applied some restoratives which he had brought with him. The face of the
       Marchioness became more animated; she stirred.  
  "She revives," said the surgeon.  
  The Marchioness breathed with some force; again; then half opened her eyes, and then
       instantly closed them.  
  "If I could but get her to take this draught!" said the surgeon.  
  "Stop—moisten her lips first," said Sidonia.  
  They placed the draught to her mouth; in a moment, she put forth her hand as if to repress
       them, then opened her eyes again, and sighed.  
  "She is herself," said the surgeon.  
  "Lucretia," said the Marquess.  
  "Sidonia," said the Marchioness.  
  Lord Monmouth looked round to invite his friend to come forward.  
  "Lady Monmouth!" said Sidonia in a gentle voice.  
  She started, rose a little on the sofa, stared around her. "Where am I?" she exclaimed.  
  "With me," said the Marquess, and he bent forward to her, and took her hand.  
  "Sidonia!" she again exclaimed in a voice of inquiry.  
  "Is here," said Lord Monmouth. "He carried you in after our accident."  
  "Accident! Why is he going to marry?"  
  The Marquess took a pinch of snuff.  
  There was an awkward pause in the chamber.  
  "I think now," said Sidonia to the surgeon, "that Lady Monmouth would take the
       draught."  
  She refused it.  
  "Try you, Sidonia," said the Marquess rather dryly.  
  "You feel yourself again?" said Sidonia, advancing.  
   with an air of stupor. "What has happened? Why am I here? Are you married?"  
  "She wanders a little," said Sidonia.  
  The Marquess took another pinch of snuff.  
  "I could have born even repulsion," said Lady Monmouth in a voice of desolation, "but not
       for another!"  
  "M. Villebecque," said the Marquess.  
  "My Lord?"  
  Lord Monmouth looked at him with that irresistible scrutiny, which would daunt a galley
       slave; and then after a short pause, said, "The carriage should have arrived by this time.
       Let us get home."  
  
  CHAPTER VI.  
  After the conversation at dinner which we have noticed, the restless and
       disquieted Coningsby wandered about Paris, vainly seeking in the distraction of a great city
       some relief from the excitement of his mind. His first resolution was immediately to depart
       for England; but when, on reflection, he was mindful that after all, the assertion which had
       so agitated him might really be without foundation, in spite of many circumstances that to
       his regardful fancy seemed to accredit it, his firm resolution began to waver.  
   Coningsby had ever experienced; and they revealed to him the immensity of the
       stake which he was hazarding on a most uncertain die.  
   infinitely wretched, scarcely able to guide his steps, dreading even to meet an
       acquaintance, and almost feeling that his tongue would refuse the office of conversation, he
       contrived to reach his grandfather's hotel, and was about to bury himself in his chamber,
       when on the staircase he met Flora.  
  Coningsby had not seen her for the last fortnight. Seeing her now, his heart smote him for
       his neglect, excusable as it really was. Any one else at this time, he would have hurried by
       without recognition, but the gentle and suffering Flora was too meek to be rudely treated by
       so kind a heart as Coningsby's.  
  He looked at her; she was pale and agitated. Her step trembled, while she still hastened
       on.  
  "What is the matter?" inquired Coningsby.  
   turned with her; but they had scarcely emerged from the court-yard when the
       carriage approached that brought Lord and Lady Monmouth home. They followed it into the
       court. They were immediately at its door.  
  "All is right, Harry," said the Marquess, calm and grave.  
  Coningsby pressed his grandfather's hand. Then he assisted Lucretia to alight.  
  "I am quite well," she said, "now."  
  "But you must lean on me, dearest Lady Monmouth," Coningsby said in a tone of great
       tenderness, as he felt Lucretia almost sinking from him. And he supported her into the hall
       of the hotel.  
  Lord Monmouth had lingered behind. Flora crept up to him, and with unwonted boldness
       offered her arm to the Marquess. He looked at her with a glance of surprise, and then a
       soften expression, one indeed of an almost winning sweetness, which, though rare, was not a
       stranger to his countenance, melted his features, and taking the arm so humbly presented, he
       said:  
  "Ma Petite, you look more frightened than any of us. Poor child!"  
  He had reached the top of the flight of steps; he withdrew his arm from Flora, and thanked
       her with all his courtesy.  
  "You are not hurt then, sir?" she ventured to ask with a look which expressed the infinite
       solicitude, which her tongue did not venture to convey.  
  "By no means, my good little girl;" and he extended his hand to her, which she reverently
       bent over and embraced.  
  
  CHAPTER VII.  
   had deeply injured him; though they really were individuals who had treated him
       with invariable kindness. But he felt their existence was a source of mortification and
       misery to him. With these feelings, sauntering away the last hours at Paris, disquieted,
       uneasy; no present, no future; no enjoyment, no hope; really, positively, undeniably,
       unhappy; unhappy too for the first time in his life; the first unhappiness—what a companion
       piece for the first love—Coningsby, of all places in the world, in the gardens of the
       Luxembourg, encountered Sir Joseph Wallinger and Edith.  
  To avoid them was impossible; they met face to face; and Sir Joseph stopped, and
       immediately reminded him that it was three days since they had seen him, as if to reproach
       him for so unprecedented a neglect. And it seemed that Edith, though she said not as much,
       felt the same. And Coningsby turned round and walked with them. He told them he was going to
       leave Paris on the morrow.  
   with unaffected surprise, and an expression of disappointment which she in vain
       attempted to conceal.  
  "The festival will be not less gay for my absence," said Coningsby with that plaintive
       moroseness not unusual to despairing lovers.  
  "If we were all to argue from the same premises and act accordingly," said Edith, "the
       saloons would be empty. But if any person's absence would be remarked, I should really have
       thought it would be yours. I thought you were one of Monsieur de Sidonia's great
       friends!"  
  "He has no friend," said Coningsby. "No wise man has. What are friends? Traitors."  
  Edith looked very much astonished. And then she said:  
  "I am sure you have not quarrelled with Monsieur de Sidonia, for we have just parted with
       him."  
  "I have no doubt you have," thought Coningsby.  
  "And it is impossible to speak of another in higher terms than he spoke of you. Sir Joseph
       observed how unusual it was for Monsieur de Sidonia to express himself so warmly."  
  "Sidonia is a great man, and carries every thing before him," said Coningsby. "I am
       nothing; I cannot cope with him; I retire from the field."  
  "What field?" inquired Sir Joseph, who did not clearly catch the drift of these
       observations. "It appears to me that a field for action is exactly what Sidonia wants. There
       is no vent for his abilities and intelligence. He wastes his energy in travelling from
       capital to capital like a King's messenger. The morning after his fête he is going to
       Madrid."  
   his mind whither he should go; but thought that he should travel direct to St.
       Petersburg. He wished to travel overland to Astrachan. That was the place he was particularly
       anxious to visit.  
  After this incomprehensible announcement, they walked on for some minutes in silence,
       broken only by occasional monosyllables with which Coningsby responded at hazard to the sound
       remarks of Sir Joseph. As they approached the Palace, a party of English who were visiting
       the Chamber of Peers, and who were acquainted with the companions of Coningsby, encountered
       them. Amid the mutual recognitions, Coningsby was about to take his leave somewhat
       ceremoniously; but Edith held forth her hand, and said:  
  "Is this indeed farewell?"  
   eyes met. The look of Edith was mournful and inquiring.  
  "We will say farewell at the ball," said Coningsby, and she rewarded him with a radiant
       smile.  
  
  CHAPTER VIII.  
  Sidonia lived in the Faubourg St. Germain in a large hotel, that, in old days, had
       belonged to the Crillons; but it had received at his hands such extensive alterations, that
       nothing of the original decoration, and little of its arrangement, remained.  
   that was wafted about. A gallery led from this hall to an inner hall of quite a
       different character; fantastic, glittering, variegated; full of strange shapes and dazzling
       objects.  
  The roof was carved and gilt in that honeycomb style prevalent in the Saracenic buildings;
       the walls were hung with leather stamped in rich and vivid patterns; the floor was a flood of
       mosaic; about were statues of negroes of human size with faces of wild expression, and
       holding in their outstretched hands silver torches that blazed with an almost painful
       brilliancy.  
  From this inner hall, a double staircase of white marble, led to the grand suite of
       apartments.  
   landscapes, or on the azure shores of Ægean waters. From the ceiling beautiful
       divinities threw garlands on the guests, who seemed surprised that the roses, unwilling to
       quit Olympus, would not descend on earth. The general effect of this fair chamber was
       heightened too by that regulation of the house which did not permit any benches in the
       ball-room. That dignified assemblage who are always found ranged in precise discipline
       against the wall, did not here mar the flowing grace of the festivity. The chaperons had no
       cause to complain. A large saloon abounded in ottomans and easy chairs at their service,
       where their delicate charges might rest when weary, or find distraction when not engaged.  
  All the world were at this fête of Sidonia. It exceeded in splendour and luxury every
       entertainment that had yet been given. The highest rank, even Princes of the blood, beauty,
       fashion, fame—all assembled in a magnificent and illuminated palace, resounding with
       exquisite melody.  
   stamped upon his brain. Tender as were his years, when he was separated from
       her, he could yet recal the very phrases in which she deplored her isolation; and there were
       numerous passages in her letters which alluded to it. Coningsby had taken occasion to sound
       the Wallingers on this subject; but he felt assured from the manner in which his advances
       were met, that they knew nothing of his mother, and attributed the hostility of Mr. Millbank
       to his grandfather solely to political emulation and local rivalries. Still there was the
       portrait and the miniature. That was a fact; a clue which ultimately, he was persuaded, must
       lead to some solution.  
   moment therefore that he found himself in the saloons of Sidonia, he was
       accosted by many whose notice was flattering; but his eye wandered, while he tried to be
       courteous and attempted to be sprightly. Where was she? He had nearly reached the ball-room
       when he met her. She was on the arm of Lord Beaumanoir, who had made her acquaintance at
       Rome, and originally claimed it as the member of a family who, as the reader may perhaps not
       forget, had experienced some kindnesses from the Millbanks.  
  There were mutual and hearty recognitions between the young men; great explanations where
       they had been, what they were doing, where they were going. Lord Beaumanoir told Coningsby he
       had introduced steeple-chaces at Rome, and had parted with Sunbeam to the nephew of a
       Cardinal. Coningsby securing Edith's hand for the next dance, they all moved on together to
       her aunt.  
  Lady Wallinger was indulging in some Roman reminiscences with the Marquess.  
  "And you are not going to Astrachan to-morrow?" said Edith.  
  "Not to-morrow," said Coningsby.  
  "You know that you said once that life was too stirring in these days to permit travel to a
       man?"  
  "I wish nothing was stirring," said Coningsby. "I wish nothing to change. All that I wish
       is, that this fête should never end"  
  "Is it possible, that you can be capricious! You perplex me very much."  
  "Am I capricious, because I dislike change?"  
  "But Astrachan?"  
  "It was the air of the Luxembourg that reminded me of the desart," said Coningsby.  
  Soon after this Coningsby led Edith to the dance. It was at a ball that he had first met
       her at Paris, and this led to other reminiscences; all most interesting. Coningsby was
       perfectly happy. All mysteries, all difficulties, were driven from his recollection; he lived
       only in the exciting and enjoyable present. Twenty-one and in love!  
  Some time after this, Coningsby who was inevitably separated from Edith, met his host.  
  "Where have you been, child," said Sidonia, "that I have not seen you for some days? I am
       going to Madrid to-morrow."  
  "And I must think, I suppose, of Cambridge."  
  "Well, you have seen something; you will find it more profitable when you have digested it;
       and you will have opportunity. That's the true spring of wisdom: meditate over the past.
       Adventure and Contemplation share our being like day and night."  
  The resolute departure for England on the morrow, had already changed into a supposed
       necessity of thinking of returning to Cambridge. In fact, Coningsby felt that to quit Paris
       and Edith was an impossibility. He silenced the remonstrance of his conscience by the
       expedient of keeping a half-term; and had no difficulty in persuading himself that a short
       delay in taking his degree could not really be of the slightest consequence.  
   French ball are not seen to advantage at this period. The custom of separating
       the sexes for this refreshment, and arranging that the ladies should partake of it by
       themselves, though originally founded in a feeling of consideration and gallantry, and with
       the determination to secure under all circumstances the convenience and comfort of the fair
       sex, is really, in its appearance and its consequences, anything but European, and produces a
       scene which rather reminds one of the harem of a sultaun, than a hall of chivalry. To judge
       from the countenances of the favoured fair, they are not themselves particularly pleased; and
       when their repast is over, they necessarily return to empty halls, and are deprived of the
       dance at the very moment when they may feel most inclined to participate in its graceful
       excitement.  
   the golden pannels of the walls containing festive sculptures by Schwanthaler,
       relieved by encaustic tinting. In its centre was a fountain, a group of Bacchantes encircling
       Dionysos; and from this fountain, as from a star, diverged the various tables from which
       sprang orange trees in fruit and flower.  
  The banquet had but one fault; Coningsby was separated from Edith. The Duchess of Grand
       Cairo, the beautiful wife of the heir of one of the Imperial illustrations, had determined to
       appropriate Coningsby as her cavalier for the moment. Distracted, he made his escape; but his
       wandering eye could not find the object of its search; and he fell prisoner to the charming
       Princess De Petitpoix, a Carlist chieftain, whose witty words avenged the cause of fallen
       dynasties and a cashiered nobility.  
   being whom he adored! And who had spoken to him in a voice sweeter than a
       serenade, and had bestowed on him a glance softer than moonlight. The lord of the palace,
       more distinguished even for his capacity than his boundless treasure, was his chosen friend;
       gained under circumstances of romantic interest, when the reciprocal influence of their
       personal qualities was affected by no accessory knowledge of their worldly positions. He
       himself was in the very bloom of youth and health; the child of a noble house, rich for his
       present wants, and with a future of considerable fortunes. Entrancing love and dazzling
       friendship, a high ambition and the pride of knowledge, the consciousness of a great
       prosperity, the vague, daring energies of the high pulse of twenty-one, all combined to
       stimulate his sense of existence, which, as he looked around him at the beautiful objects and
       listened to the delicious sounds, seemed to him a dispensation of almost supernatural
       ecstacy.  
   Coningsby entered a chamber which seemed deserted. Yet he heard sounds as it
       were of earnest conversation. It was a voice that invited his progress; he advanced another
       step, then suddenly stopped. There were two individuals in the room, by whom he was
       unnoticed. They were Sidonia and Miss Millbank. They were sitting on a sofa, Sidonia holding
       her hand and endeavouring, as it seemed, to soothe her. Her tones were tremulous; but the
       expression of her face was fond and confiding. It was all the work of a moment. Coningsby
       instantly withdrew, yet could not escape hearing an earnest request from Edith to her
       companion that he would write to her.  
  In a few seconds Coningsby had quitted the hotel of Sidonia, and the next day found him on
       his road to England.  
  
  
  BOOK VII.  
  CHAPTER I.  
   domes and towers rise in purple lustre against the resplendent horizon!  
  And yet the disturbing emotions of existence and the bitter inheritance of humanity, should
       exercise but a modified sway and entail but a light burden, within the circle of the city in
       which the next scene of our history leads us. For it is the sacred city of Study, of
       Learning, and of Faith; and the declining beam is resting on the dome of the Radcliffe,
       lingering on the towers of Christchurch and Magdalen, sanctifying the spires and pinnacles of
       holy St. Mary's.  
   to be the arrival of a first-rate light coach in a country town! The small
       machine crowded with so many passengers, the foaming and curvetting leaders, the wheelers
       more steady, and glossy as if they had not done their ten miles in the hour, the triumphant
       bugle of the guard, and the haughty routine with which the driver, as he reached his goal,
       threw his whip to the obedient ostlers in attendance; and not least the staring crowd, a
       little awe-struck, and looking for the moment at the lowest official of the stable with
       considerable respect; altogether made a picture which one recollects with cheerfulness, and
       misses now in many a dreary market town.  
  Our Oxonian was a young man about the middle height, and naturally of a very thoughtful
       expression and rather reserved mien. The general character of his countenance was indeed a
       little stern, but it broke into an almost bewitching smile, and a blush suffused his face, as
       he sprang forward and welcomed an individual about the same age, who had jumped off the
       Blenheim.  
  "Well, Coningsby!" he exclaimed, extending both his hands.  
  "By Jove, my dear Millbank, we have met at last," said his friend.  
   beautiful! And there had seemed between them a sympathy so native and
       spontaneous, creating at once the charm of intimacy without any of the disenchanting
       attributes, that are occasionally its consequence. He would recall the tones of her voice,
       the expression of her soft dark eye, the airy spirit and frank graciousness, sometimes even
       the flattering blush, with which she had ever welcomed one of whom she had heard so long and
       so kindly. It seemed, to use a sweet and homely phrase, that they were made for each other;
       the circumstances of their mutual destinies might have combined into one enchanting fate.  
   manufacturer? Why was the portrait of his mother beneath the roof of Millbank?
       Coningsby had delicately touched upon the subject both with Edith and the Wallingers, but the
       result of his inquiries only involved the question in deeper gloom. Edith had none but
       maternal relatives; more than once she had mentioned this, and the Wallingers on other
       occasions had confirmed the remark. Coningsby had sometimes drawn the conversation to
       pictures, and he would remind her with playfulness of their first unconscious meeting in the
       gallery of the Rue Tronchet; then he remembered that Mr. Millbank was fond of pictures; then
       he recollected some specimens of Mr. Millbank's collection, and after touching on several
       which could not excite suspicion, he came to "a portrait, a portrait of a lady; was it a
       portrait, or an ideal countenance?"  
  Edith thought she had heard it was a portrait, but she was by no means certain; and most
       assuredly was quite unacquainted with the name of the original, if there were an
       original.  
   with Sir Joseph. He inquired of the uncle explicity, whether he knew anything on
       the subject. Sir Joseph was of opinion that it was something that Millbank had somewhere
       "picked up." Millbank used often to "pick up" pictures.  
   degree, and in a few days was about to quit that University where on the whole
       he had passed three serene and happy years, in the society of fond and faithful friends, and
       in ennobling pursuits. He had many plans for his impending movements, yet none of them very
       mature ones. Lord Vere wished Coningsby to visit his family in the north, and afterwards to
       go to Scotland together; Coningsby was more inclined to travel for a year. Amid this
       hesitation, a circumstance occurred which decided him to adopt neither of these courses.  
   evidently intended never to leave her side.  
  And the next morning, the occasion favourable, being alone with the lady, Sir Joseph
       bustling about a carriage, Coningsby said suddenly with a countenance a little disturbed, and
       in a low voice, "I was pleased, I mean surprised to hear that there was still a Miss
       Millbank; I thought by this time she might have borne another name?"  
  Lady Wallinger looked at him with an expression of some perplexity, and then said, "Yes,
       Edith was very much admired; but she need not be precipitate in marrying. Marriage is for a
       woman   the   event. Edith is too precious to be carelessly bestowed."  
  "But I understood," said Coningsby, "when I left Paris," and here he became very confused,
       "that Miss Millbank was engaged, on the point of marriage."  
  "With whom?"  
  "Our friend, Sidonia."  
   Edith. 'Tis a preposterous idea," said Lady Wallinger.  
  "But he very much admired her?" said Coningsby with a searching eye.  
  "Possibly," said Lady Wallinger, "but he never even intimated his admiration."  
  "But he was very attentive to Miss Millbank?"  
  "Not more than our intimate friendship authorised, and might expect."  
  "You have known Sidonia a long time?"  
   influence of Sidonia could have effected this. Therefore of course Edith is
       attached to him, almost as much as I am. In short, he is our dearest friend; our counsellor
       in all our cares. But as for marrying him, the idea is ridiculous to those who know Monsieur
       Sidonia. No earthly consideration would ever induce him to impair that purity of race on
       which he prides himself. Besides there are other obvious objections, which would render an
       alliance between him and my niece utterly impossible; Edith is quite as devoted to her
       religion as Monsieur Sidonia can be to his race."  
   that Mr. Millbank had taken up his abode there. He did not much like the change
       of life Sir Joseph told Coningsby, but Edith was delighted with Hellingsley, which Sir Joseph
       understood was a very distinguished place, with very fine gardens of which his niece was
       particularly fond.  
   had quitted Eton. How much had happened in the interval! What new ideas, new
       feelings, vast and novel knowledge! Though they had not met, they were nevertheless familiar
       with the progress and movement of each other's minds. Their suggestive correspondence was too
       valuable to both of them to have been otherwise than cherished. And now they were to meet, on
       the eve of entering that world for which they had made so sedulous a preparation.  
  
  CHAPTER II.  
   conversant, from fear that you may appropriate his best thoughts. One of the
       principal causes of our renowned dullness in conversation is our extreme intellectual
       jealousy. It must be admitted that in this respect authors, but especially poets, bear the
       palm. They never think they are sufficiently appreciated, and live in tremour lest a brother
       should distinguish himself. Artists have the repute of being nearly as bad. And as for a
       small rising politician, a clever speech by a supposed rival or suspected candidate for
       office, destroys his appetite and disturbs his slumbers.  
  One of the chief delights and benefits of travel is that one is perpetually meeting men of
       great abilities, of original mind, and rare acquirements, who will converse without reserve.
       In these discourses, the intellect makes daring leaps and marvellous advances. The tone that
       colours our after life is often caught in these chance colloquies, and the bent given that
       shapes a career.  
   the memory more rich and happy, or the tongue more prompt and eloquent, than
       when two school-day friends, knit by every sympathy of intelligence and affection, meet at
       the close of their college careers, after a long separation, hesitating as it were on the
       verge of active life, and compare together their conclusions of the interval; impart to each
       other all their thoughts and secret plans and projects; high fancies and noble aspirations;
       glorious visions of personal fame and national regeneration.  
  Ah! why should such enthusiasm ever die! Life is too short to be little. Man is never so
       manly as when he feels deeply, acts boldly, and expresses himself with frankness and with
       fervour.  
   details are only for conversation. Each poured forth his mind without stint. Not
       an author that had influenced their taste or judgment, but was canvassed and criticised; not
       a theory they had framed or a principle they had adopted that was not confessed. Often with
       boyish glee still lingering with their earnest purpose, they shouted as they discovered that
       they had formed the same opinion or adopted the same conclusion. They talked all day and late
       into the night. They condensed into a week the poignant conclusions of three years of almost
       unbroken study. And one night as they sat together in Millbank's rooms at Oriel, their
       conversation having for some time taken a political colour, Millbank said:  
  "Now tell me, Coningsby, exactly what you conceive to be the state of parties in this
       country; for it seems to me that if we penetrate the surface, the classification must be more
       simple than their many names would intimate."  
   arisen in the State, who demand that the principle of political liberalism shall
       consequently be carried to its extent; which it appears to them is impossible without getting
       rid of the fragments of the old Constitution that remain. This is the Destructive party; a
       party with distinct and intelligible principles. They seek a specific for the evils of our
       social system in the general suffrage of the population.  
   Constitution in Church and State no longer exists; they are ready to stand or
       fall with the "independence of the Upper House of Parliament," though, in practice, they are
       perfectly aware, that, with their sanction, the "Upper House" has abdicated its initiatory
       functions, and now serves only as a Court of Review of the legislation of the House of
       Commons. Whenever public opinion which this party never attempts to form, to educate, or to
       lead, falls into some violent perplexity, passion, or caprice, this party yields without a
       struggle to the impulse, and when the storm has past, attempts to obstruct and obviate the
       logical, and ultimately the inevitable, results of the very measures they have themselves
       originated, or to which they have consented. This is the Conservative party.  
  "I care not whether men are called Whigs or Tories, Radicals or Chartists, or by what
       nickname a bustling and thoughtless race may designate themselves; but these two divisions
       comprehend at present the English nation.  
   government carried on by a neglected democracy, who, for three centuries, have
       received no education. What prospect does it offer us of those high principles of conduct
       with which we have fed our imaginations and strengthened our will? I perceive none of the
       elements of government that should secure the happiness of a people and the greatness of a
       realm.  
  But in my opinion if Democracy be combated only by Conservativism, Democracy must triumph,
       and at no distant date. This then is our position. The man who enters public life at this
       epoch has to choose between Political Infidelity and a Destructive Creed."  
  "This then," said Millbank, "is the dilemma to which we are brought by nearly two centuries
       of Parliamentary Monarchy and Parliamentary Church?"  
  "'Tis true," said Coningsby. "We cannot conceal it from ourselves, that the first has made
       Government detested, and the second, Religion disbelieved."  
   are reconciled to the contemplation of democracy, because they have accustomed
       themselves to believe that it is the only power by which we can sweep away those sectional
       privileges and interests that impede the intelligence and industry of the community."  
  "And yet," said Coningsby, "the only way to terminate what in the language of the present
       day is called Class Legislation is not to intrust power to classes. You would find a
       loco-foco majority as much addicted to Class Legislation as a factitious aristocracy. The
       only power, that has no class sympathy is the Sovereign."  
  "But suppose the case of an arbitrary Sovereign, what would be your check against him?"  
  "The same as against an arbitrary Parliament."  
  "But a Parliament is responsible."  
  "To whom?"  
  "To their constituent body."  
  "Suppose it was to vote itself perpetual?"  
  "But public opinion would prevent that."  
  "And is public opinion of less influence on an individual than on a body?"  
  "But public opinion may be indifferent: a nation may be misled, may be corrupt."  
  "If the nation that elects the Parliament be corrupt, the elected body will resemble it.
       The nation that is corrupt, deserves to fall. But this only shows that there is something to
       be considered beyond forms of government—national character. And herein mainly should we
       repose our hopes. If a nation be led to aim at the good and the great, depend upon it,
       whatever be its form, the government will respond to its convictions and its sentiments."  
  "Do you then declare against Parliamentary government?"  
  "Far from it: I look upon political change as the greatest of evils, for it comprehends
       all. But if we have no faith in the permanence of the existing settlement, if the very
       individuals who established it year after year are proposing their modifications or their
       reconstructions, so also, while we uphold what exists, ought we to prepare ourselves for the
       change we deem impending?  
   our fellow citizens, should be taken unawares as in 1832, when the very men who
       opposed the Reform Bill offered contrary objections to it which destroyed each other, so
       ignorant were they of its real character, its historical causes, its political consequences.
       We should now so act, that when the occasion arrives, we should clearly comprehend what we
       want, and have formed an opinion as to the best means by which that want can be supplied.  
  "For this purpose, I would accustom the public mind to the contemplation of an existing
       though torpid power in the constitution; capable of removing our social grievances were we to
       transfer to it those prerogatives which the Parliament has gradually usurped, and used in a
       manner which has produced the present material and moral disorganisation. The House of
       Commons is the house of a few; the Sovereign is the Sovereign of all. The proper leader of
       the people is the individual who sits upon the throne."  
  "Then you abjure the Representative principle?"  
   more efficiently; and in which discussion is pursued on fairer terms, and often
       with more depth and information."  
  "And to what power would you intrust the function of Taxation?"  
  "To some power that would employ it more discreetly than in creating our present amount of
       debt, and in establishing our present system of imposts.  
   not speak French; no more bishops ignorant of theology; no more
       generals-in-chief who never saw a field.  
  "Now there is a polity adapted to our laws, our institutions, our feelings, our manners,
       our traditions; a polity capable of great ends, and appealing to high sentiments; a polity
       which in my opinion would render government an object of national affection; which would
       terminate sectional anomalies, assuage religious heats, and extinguish Chartism."  
   by the principle of enlightened loyalty, how would you encounter religious
       infidelity in a state? By what means is the principle of profound reverence to be revived?
       How, in short, is man to be led to adore?"  
  "Ah! that is a subject which I have not forgotten," replied Coningsby. "I know from your
       letters, how deeply it has engaged your thoughts. I confess to you that it has often filled
       mine with perplexity and depression. When we were at Eton, and both of us impregnated with
       the contrary prejudices in which we had been brought up, there was still between us one
       common ground of sympathy and trust; we reposed with confidence and affection in the bosom of
       our Church. Time and Thought, with both of us, have only matured the spontaneous veneration
       of our boyhood. But Time and Thought have also shown me, that the Church of our heart is not
       in a position, as regards the community, consonant with its original and essential character,
       or with the welfare of the nation."  
   replied Millbank. "Once the Church in this country was universal, in principle
       and practice; when wedded to the State, it continued at least universal in principle, if not
       in practice. What is it now? All ties between the State and the Church are abolished except
       those, which tend to its danger and degradation.  
   interference in ecclesiastical government, and on the side of the Church a
       sedulous avoidance of all those principles on which alone Church government can be
       established, and by the influence of which alone can the Church of England again become
       universal."  
  "But it is urged that the State protects its revenues?"  
   Cæsars. It would do as great things now, if it were divorced from the degrading
       and tyrannical connection that enchains it. You would have other sons of peasants Bishops of
       England instead of men appointed to that sacred office solely because they were the needy
       scions of a factitious aristocracy; men of gross ignorance, profligate habits, and grinding
       extortion; who have disgraced the episcopal throne, and profaned the altar."  
  "But surely you cannot justly extend such a description to the present bench."  
   could have maintained even the disorganised body that still survives.  
   equally barbarising. The priests of God are the tribunes of the people. Oh!
       ignorant! that with such a mission, they should ever have cringed in the anti-chambers of
       ministers, or bowed before parliamentary committees!"  
  "The Utilitarian system is dead," said Coningsby. "It has past through the heaven of
       philosophy like a hail storm; cold, noisy, sharp and peppering; and it has melted away. And
       yet can we wonder that it found some success, when we consider the political ignorance and
       social torpor which it assailed? Anointed Kings turned into chief magistrates, and therefore
       much overpaid; Estates of the Realm changed into parliaments of virtual representation, and
       therefore requiring real reform; Holy Church transformed into national establishment, and
       therefore grumbled at by all the nation for whom it was not supported. What an inevitable
       harvest of Sedition, Radicalism, Infidelity! I really think there is no society, however
       great its resources, that could long resist the united influences of Chief Magistrate,
       Virtual Representation, and Church Establishment!"  
  "I have immense faith in the New Generation," said Millbank eagerly.  
  "It is a holy thing to see a State saved by its youth," said Coningsby, and then he added
       in a tone of humility, if not of depression: "But what a task! What a variety of qualities,
       what a combination of circumstances are requisite! What bright abilities and what noble
       patience! What confidence from the People, what favour from the Most High!"  
  "But he will favour us," said Millbank. "And I say to you as Nathan said unto David, 'Thou
       art the man!' You were our leader at Eton; the friends of your heart and boyhood still cling
       and cluster around you, they are all men whose position forces them into public life. It is a
       nucleus of honour, faith and power. You have only to dare. And will you not dare? It is our
       privilege to live in an age when the career of the highest ambition is identified with the
       performance of the greatest good. Of the present epoch it may be truly said, 'Who dares to be
       good, dares to be great.'"  
  "Heaven is above all," said Coningsby. "The curtain of our fate is still undrawn. We are
       happy in our friends, dear Millbank, and whatever lights, we will stand together. For myself,
       I prefer fame to life; and yet, the consciousness of heroic deeds to the most widespread
       celebrity."  
  
  CHAPTER III.  
   gardens. The hall itself during many generations had been vigilantly and
       tastefully preserved by its proprietors. There was not a point which was not as fresh as if
       it had been renovated but yesterday. It stood a huge and strange blending of Grecian, Gothic,
       and Italian architecture, with a wild dash of the Fantastic in addition. The lantern
       watch-towers of a baronial castle were placed in juxta position with Doric columns employed
       for chimneys, while under oriel windows might be observed Italian doorways with Grecian
       pediments. Beyond the extensive gardens, an avenue of Spanish chestnuts at each point of the
       compass approached the mansion, or led into a small park which was table land, its limits
       opening on all sides to beautiful and extensive valleys, sparkling with cultivation, except
       at one point, where the river Darl formed the boundary of the domain, and then spread in many
       a winding through the rich country beyond.  
   first time. Coningsby and himself had travelled together as far as Darlford,
       where their roads diverged, and they had separated with an engagement on the part of
       Coningsby to visit Hellingsley on the morrow. As they had travelled along, Coningsby had
       frequently led the conversation to domestic topics: gradually he had talked, and talked much,
       of Edith. Without an obtrusive curiosity, he extracted unconsciously to his companion traits
       of her character and early days, which filled him with a wild and secret interest. The
       thought that in a few hours, he was to meet her again, infused into his being a degree of
       transport, which the very necessity of repressing before his companion, rendered more magical
       and thrilling. How often it happens in life, that we have with a grave face to discourse of
       the most ordinary topics, while, all the time our heart and memory are engrossed with some
       enchanting secret!  
   The Marquess had given him a formal permission to repair to it at his pleasure,
       and had instructed the steward accordingly. But he came without notice, at a season of the
       year when the absence of all sports made his arrival unexpected. The scattered and sauntering
       household roused themselves into action, and contemplated the conviction that it might be
       necessary to do some service for their wages. There was a stir in that vast, sleepy castle.
       At last the steward was found, and came forward to welcome their young master, whose simple
       wants were limited to the rooms he had formerly occupied.  
   between his own domain and Hellingsley. Who dwelt at Hellingsley now?  
  Restless, excited, not insensible to the difficulties, perhaps the dangers, of his
       position, yet full of an entrancing emotion in which all thoughts and feelings seemed to
       merge, Coningsby went forth into the fair gardens to muse over his love amid objects as
       beautiful. A rosy light hung over the rare shrubs and tall fantastic trees; while a rich yet
       darker tint suffused the distant woods. This euthanasia of the day exercises a strange
       influence on the hearts of those who love. Who has not felt it? Magical emotions that touch
       the immortal part!  
   of all obstacles should mould such an imagination into reality.  
  He descended the slopes, now growing dimmer in the fleeting light, into the park. The
       stillness was almost supernatural; the jocund sounds of day had died, and the voices of the
       night had not commenced. His heart too was still. A sacred calm had succeeded to that
       distraction of emotion which had agitated him the whole day, while he had mused over his love
       and the infinite and insurmountable barriers that seemed to oppose his will. Now he felt one
       of those strong groundless convictions that are the inspiration of passion, that all would
       yield to him as to one holding an enchanted wand.  
   and shadowy woods, he traced his prescient way.  
  He came to the bank of a rushing river, foaming in the moonlight, and wafting on its blue
       breast the shadow of a thousand stars.  
  "O! River!" he said, "that rollest to my mistress, bear her, bear her, my heart!"  
  
  CHAPTER IV.  
   their perfume. Oswald and Sir Joseph were surveying the stables; Mr. Millbank,
       who had been daily expected for the last week from the factories, had not yet arrived.  
  "I must say he gained my heart from the first," said Lady Wallinger.  
  "I wish the gardener would send us more roses," said Edith.  
  "He is so very superior to any young man I ever met," continued Lady Wallinger.  
  "I think we must have this vase entirely of roses; don't you think so, aunt?" inquired her
       niece.  
  "I am very fond of roses," said Lady Wallinger. "What beautiful bouquets Mr. Coningsby gave
       us at Paris, Edith!"  
  "Beautiful!"  
  "I must say, I was very happy when I met Mr. Coningsby again at Cambridge," said Lady
       Wallinger. "It gave me much greater pleasure than seeing any of the colleges."  
  "How delighted Oswald seems at having Mr. Coningsby for a companion again," said Edith.  
  "And very naturally," said Lady Wallinger. "Oswald ought to deem himself very fortunate in
       having such a friend. I am sure the kindness of Mr. Coningsby when we met him at Cambridge is
       what I never shall forget. But he always was my favourite from the first I saw him at Paris.
       Do you know, Edith, I liked him the best of all your admirers?"  
  "Oh! no, aunt," said Edith, smiling, "not more than Lord Beaumanoir; you forget your great
       favourite Lord Beaumanoir."  
  "But I did not know Mr. Coningsby at Rome," said Lady Wallinger, "I cannot agree that any
       body is equal to Mr. Coningsby. I cannot tell you how pleased I am that he is our
       neighbour!"  
  As Lady Wallinger gave a finishing stroke to the jacket of her Andalusian, Edith vividly
       blushing, yet speaking in a voice of affected calmness, said,  
  "Here is Mr. Coningsby, aunt."  
   was a ringing at the Hall bell, and then after a short pause, the servants
       announced Mr. Coningsby, and ushered him into the morning room.  
  Edith was embarrassed; the frankness and the gaiety of her manner had deserted her;
       Coningsby was rather earnest than self-possessed. Each felt at first, that the presence of
       Lady Wallinger was a relief. The ordinary topics of conversation were in sufficient plenty;
       reminiscences of Paris, impressions of Hellingsley, his visit to Oxford, Lady Wallinger's
       visit to Cambridge. In ten minutes, their voices seemed to sound to each other as they did in
       the Rue de Rivoli, and their mutual perplexity had in a great degree subsided.  
   should be general; and in the course of half an hour, Coningsby was walking by
       the side of Edith, and sympathising with all the natural charms to which her quick taste and
       lively expression called his notice and appreciation. Few things more delightful than a
       country ramble with a sweet companion! Exploring woods, wandering over green commons,
       loitering in shady lanes, resting on rural stiles; the air full of perfume, the heart full of
       bliss!  
   phrase of sweet simplicity; or carried him spell-bound by her airy
       merriment.  
  Oswald assumed that Coningsby remained to dine with them. There was not even the ceremony
       of invitation. Coningsby could not but remember his dinner at Millbank, and the timid hostess
       whom he then addressed so often in vain, as he gazed on the bewitching and accomplished woman
       whom he now passionately loved. It was a most agreeable dinner. Oswald, happy in his friend
       being his guest under his own roof, indulged in unwonted gaiety.  
   those who would deprive her Majesty of the "friends of her youth." Sir Joseph
       was a most chivalrous champion of the "friends of her youth" principle. Sir Joseph who was
       always moderate and conciliatory in his talk, though he would go, at any time, any lengths
       for his party, expressed himself to-day with extreme sobriety, as he was determined not to
       hurt the feelings of Mr. Coningsby, and he principally confined himself to urging temperate
       questions, somewhat in the following fashion:  
  "I admit that on the whole, under ordinary circumstances, it would perhaps have been more
       convenient that these appointments should have remained with Sir Robert, but don't you think
       that under the peculiar circumstances, being friends of her Majesty's youth? &amp;c.,
       &amp;c."  
   from admiring the "friends of her youth" principle, which he looked upon as
       very impertinent.  
  "But surely," said Sir Joseph, "the Minister being responsible to Parliament, it must
       follow that all great offices of State should be filled at his discretion."  
  "But where do you find this principle of Ministerial responsibility?" inquired
       Coningsby.  
  "And is not a Minister responsible to his Sovereign?" inquired Millbank.  
  Sir Joseph seemed a little confused. He had always heard that Ministers were responsible to
       Parliament; and he had a vague conviction, notwithstanding the reanimating loyalty of the
       Bed-Chamber Plot, that the Sovereign of England was a nonentity. He took refuge in indefinite
       expressions, and observed, "The Responsibility of Ministers is surely a constitutional
       doctrine!"  
  "The Ministers of the Crown are responsible to their master; they are not the Ministers of
       Parliament."  
   Joseph, "the Parliament, that is the House of Commons, governs the
       country."  
  "It did before 1832," said Coningsby; "but that is all past now. We got rid of that with
       the Venetian Constitution."  
  "The Venetian Constitution!" said Sir Joseph.  
  "To be sure," said Millbank. "We were governed in this country by the Venetian Constitution
       from the accession of the House of Hanover. But that yoke is past. And now, I hope we are in
       a state of transition from the Italian Dogeship to the English Monarchy."  
  "King, Lords and Commons, the Venetian Constitution!" exclaimed Sir Joseph.  
  "But they were phrases," said Coningsby, "not facts. The King was a Doge; the Cabinet the
       Council of Ten. Your Parliament, that you call Lords and Commons, was nothing more than the
       Great Council of Nobles."  
  "The resemblance was complete," said Millbank, "and no wonder, for it was not accidental;
       the Venetian Constitution was intentionally copied."  
  "We should have had the Venetian Republic in 1640," said Coningsby, "had it not been for
       the Puritans. Geneva beat Venice."  
  "I am sure these ideas are not very generally known," said Sir Joseph bewildered.  
  "Because you have had your history written by the Venetian party," said Coningsby, "and it
       has been their interest to conceal them."  
  "I will venture to say that there are very few men on our side in the House of Commons,"
       said Sir Joseph, "who are aware that they were born under a Venetian Constitution."  
  "Let us go to the ladies," said Millbank smiling.  
  Edith was reading a letter as they entered.  
  "A letter from papa," she exclaimed looking up at her brother with great animation. "We may
       expect him every day, and yet, alas! he cannot fix one."  
   "You once made me a promise which you never fulfilled. I shall claim it
       to-night."  
  "And what can that be?"  
  "The song that you promised me at Millbank more than three years ago."  
  "Your memory is very good."  
  "It has dwelt upon the subject."  
  Then they spoke for awhile of other recollections, and then, Coningsby appealing to Lady
       Wallinger for her influence, Edith rose and took up her guitar. Her voice was rich and sweet;
       the air she sang gay, even fantastically frolick; such as the girls of Granada chaunt
       trooping home from some country festival; her soft, dark eye brightened with joyous sympathy;
       and ever and anon, with an arch grace, she beat the guitar, in chorus, with her pretty
       hand.  
  The moon wanes; and Coningsby must leave these enchanted halls. Oswald walked homeward with
       him, until he reached the domain of his grandfather. Then mounting his horse, Coningsby bade
       his friend farewell till the morrow, and made his best way to the Castle.  
  
  CHAPTER V.  
   and common people in the common world making common observations on them;
       asking who they were, or telling who they were; and brushing the bloom of all life's fresh
       delicious fancies with their coarse handling.  
  But now his feelings were ethereal. He loved, passionately—and he loved in a scene and in a
       society as sweet, as pure, and as refined, as his imagination and his heart. There was no
       malicious gossip, no callous chatter, to profane his ear and desecrate his sentiment. All
       that he heard or saw was worthy of the summer sky, the still green woods, the gushing river,
       the gardens and terraces, the stately and fantastic dwellings, among which his life now
       glided as in some dainty and gorgeous masque.  
   feelings and kind words; in the cultivation of happy talents and refined
       tastes; and the enjoyment of a life which their own good sense and own good hearts made them
       both comprehend and appreciate. Ambition lost much of its splendour, even his lofty
       aspirations something of their hallowing impulse of paramount duty, when Coningsby felt how
       much ennobling delight was consistent with the seclusion of a private station; and mused over
       an existence to be passed amid woods and waterfalls with a fair hand locked in his; or
       surrounded by his friends in some ancestral hall.  
   thinking of things even sweeter; listening to delicious songs, and sometimes
       reading aloud some bright romance, or some inspiring lay.  
   meet, and glances are withdrawn: the tongue may speak idly, the eye is more
       eloquent; and often more true.  
  Coningsby looked up; Lady Wallinger who had more than once announced, that she was going to
       put on her bonnet, was gone. Yet still he continued to talk trifles; and still Edith
       listened.  
  "Of all that you have told me," said Edith, "nothing pleases me so much as your description
       of St. Geneviève. How much I should like to catch the deer at sunset on the heights! What a
       pretty drawing it would make!"  
  "You would like Eustace Lyle," said Coningsby. "He is so shy and yet so ardent."  
  "You have such a band of friends, Oswald was saying this morning there was no one who had
       so many devoted friends."  
  "We are all united by sympathy; it is the only bond of friendship; and yet friendship—"  
   "you will find me roaming on the terrace."  
  "We come, dear aunt."  
  And yet they did not move. There were yet a few pencil touches to be given to the tinted
       sketch; Coningsby would cut the pencils.  
  "Would you give me," he said, "some slight memorial of Hellingsby and your art! I would not
       venture to hope for anything half so beautiful as this; but the slightest sketch. I should so
       like when away to have it hanging in my room."  
  A blush suffused the cheek of Edith, she turned her head a little aside, as if she were
       arranging some drawings. And then she said in a somewhat hushed and hesitating voice,  
  "I am sure I will do so; and with pleasure. A view of the Hall itself; I think that would
       be the best memorial. Where shall we take it from? We will decide in our walk," and she rose,
       and promising immediately to return, left the room.  
   father of Edith. A light step roused him; she had returned, Unconsciously he
       greeted her with a glance of ineffable tenderness.  
  They went forth; it was a grey, sultry day. Indeed it was the covered sky which had led to
       the fishing scheme of the morning; Sir Joseph was a very expert and accomplished angler; and
       the Darl was renowned for its sport. They lingered before they reached the terrace where they
       were to find Lady Wallinger, observing the different points of view which the Hall presented,
       and debating which was to form the subject of Coningsby's drawing; for already it was to be
       not merely a sketch, but a drawing, the most finished that the bright and effective pencil of
       Edith could achieve. If it really were to be placed in his room, and were to be a memorial of
       Hellingsley, her artistic reputation demanded a master-piece.  
   Edith of the justness of his opinion. To the fishing cottage therefore they
       bent their steps. They emerged from the gardens into the Park, sauntering over the table
       land, and seeking as much as possible the shade in the soft but oppressive atmosphere. At the
       limit of the table land their course lay by a wild and winding path through a gradual and
       wooded declivity. While they were yet in this craggy and romantic woodland, the big, fervent
       drops began to fall. Coningsby urged Edith to seek at once a natural shelter; but she, who
       knew the country, assured him that the fishing cottage was close by, and that they might
       reach it before the rain could do them any harm.  
   low, dark roof of the fishing cottage on its banks. They descended from the
       woods to the margin of the stream, by a flight of turfen steps, Coningsby holding Edith's
       hand as he guided her progress.  
  The drops became thicker; they reached, at a rapid pace, the cottage. The absent boat
       indicated that Sir Joseph and Oswald were on the river. The cottage was an old building of
       rustic logs, with a very shelving roof so that you might obtain sufficient shelter without
       entering its walls. Coningsby found a rough garden seat for Edith. The shower was now
       violent.  
   the stream; a glowing light fell upon the woods and waters; the perfume of
       trees and flowers and herbs floated around. There was a carolling of birds; a hum of happy
       insects in the air; freshness and stir, and a sense of joyous life, pervaded all things; it
       seemed that the heart of all creation opened.  
  Coningsby, after repeatedly watching the shower with Edith, and speculating on its progress
       which did not much annoy them, had seated himself on a log almost at her feet. And assuredly
       a maiden and a youth more beautiful and engaging had seldom met before in a scene more fresh
       and fair. Edith on her rustic seat watched the now blue and foaming river, and the birch
       trees with a livelier tint, and quivering in the sunset air; an expression of tranquil bliss
       suffused her beautiful brow, and spoke from the thrilling tenderness of her soft dark eye.
       Coningsby gazed on that countenance with a glance of entranced rapture. His cheek was
       flushed, his eye gleamed with dazzling lustre. She turned her head, she met that glance, and,
       troubled, she withdrew her own.  
  "Edith," he said, in a tone of tremulous passion, "let me call you Edith! Yes," he
       continued, gently taking her hand, "Let me call you my Edith! I love you!"  
  She did not withdraw her hand; but turned away a face flushed as the impending
       twilight.  
  
  CHAPTER VI.  
   season of meditation. Her heart was still agitated by the tremulous admission
       that she responded to that fervent and adoring love whose eloquent music still sounded in her
       ear, and the pictures of whose fanciful devotion flitted over her agitated vision.
       Unconsciously she pressed the arm of Coningsby as the servant spoke, and then without looking
       into his face, whispering him to be quick, she sprang away.  
  As for Coningsby, notwithstanding the elation of his heart, and the ethereal joy which
       flowed in all his veins, the name of Mr. Millbank sounded something like a knell. However
       this was not the time to reflect. He obeyed the hint of Edith; made the most rapid toilette
       that ever was consummated by a happy lover, and in a few minutes entered the drawing-room of
       Hellingsley; to encounter the gentleman whom he hoped by some means or other, quite
       inconceivable, might some day be transformed into his father-in-law, and the fulfilment of
       his consequent duties towards whom he had commenced by keeping him waiting for dinner.  
   extending his hand to Coningsby. "You seem to have taken a long walk."  
  Coningsby looked round to the kind Lady Wallinger, and half addressed his murmured answer
       to her, explaining how they had lost her, and their way, and were caught in a storm or a
       shower, which as it terminated about three hours back, and the fishing cottage was little
       more than a mile from the Hall, very satisfactorily accounted for their not being in time for
       dinner.  
   who in turn are devoted to him, making a great and inconvenient effort to reach
       them by dinner time; to please and surprise them; and finding them all dispersed, dinner so
       late, that he might have reached home in good time without any great inconvenient effort, his
       daughter whom he has wished a thousand times to embrace, taking a singularly long ramble with
       no other companion than a young gentleman, whom he did not exactly expect to see; all these
       are circumstances individually perhaps slight, and yet encountered collectively, it may be
       doubted whether they would not a little ruffle even the sweetest temper.  
   his niece. Coningsby put his arm round the astonished neck of Oswald as if they
       were once more in the playing fields of Eton.  
  "By Jove! my dear fellow," he exclaimed, "I am so sorry we kept your father for
       dinner."  
   him. On the whole, affairs went on flowingly enough. The gentlemen indeed
       stayed much longer over their wine than on the preceding days, and Coningsby did not venture
       on the liberty of quitting the room before his host. It was as well. Edith required repose.
       She tried to seek it on the bosom of her aunt, as she breathed to her the delicious secret of
       her life. When the gentlemen returned to the drawing-room, the ladies were not there.  
  This rather disturbed Mr. Millbank again; he had not seen enough of his daughter; he wished
       to hear her sing. But Edith managed to reappear; and even to sing. Then Coningsby went up to
       her and asked her to sing the song of the Girls of Granada. She said in a low voice, and with
       a fond yet serious look,  
  "I am not in the mood for such a song, but if you wish me—"  
   solemn and even troubled expression of her countenance a moment afterwards.  
  The day was about to die; the day the most important, the most precious, in the lives of
       Harry Coningsby and Edith Millbank. Words had been spoken, vows breathed, which were to
       influence their careers for ever. For them hereafter there was to be but one life, one
       destiny, one world. Each of them was still in such a state of tremulous excitement, that
       neither had found time or occasion to ponder over the mighty result. They both required
       solitude; they both longed to be alone. Coningsby rose to depart. He pressed the soft hand of
       Edith, and his glance spoke his soul.  
  "We shall see you at breakfast to-morrow, Coningsby!" said Oswald, very loud, knowing that
       the presence of his father would make Coningsby hesitate about coming. Edith's heart
       fluttered; but she said nothing. It was with delight she heard her father, after a moment's
       pause, say,  
  "Oh! I beg we may have that pleasure."  
   "but if you will permit me, I hope to have the pleasure of hearing from you
       to-morrow, sir, that your journey has not fatigued you."  
  
  CHAPTER VII.  
  To be alone; to have no need of feigning a tranquillity he could not feel; of
       coining common-place courtesy, when his heart was gushing with rapture; this was a great
       relief for Coningsby, though gained by a separation from Edith.  
   He turned to gaze upon the moonlit towers and peaked roofs of Hellingsley.
       Silent and dreamlike, the picturesque pile rested on its broad terrace flooded with the
       silver light, and surrounded by the quaint bowers of its fantastic gardens tipped by the
       glittering beam. Half hid in deep shadow, half sparkling in the mid-night blaze, he
       recognized the oriel window that had been the subject of the morning's sketch. Almost he
       wished there should be some sound to assure him of his reality. But nothing broke the
       all-pervading stillness. Was his life to be as bright and as tranquil? And what was to be his
       life?  
  Whither was he to bear the beautiful bride he had gained? Were the portals of Coningsby the
       proud and hospitable gates that were to greet her? How long would they greet him after the
       achievement of the last four and twenty hours was known to their Lord? Was this the return
       for the confiding kindness of his grandsire? That he should pledge his troth to the daughter
       of that grandsire's foe?  
  Away with such dark and scaring vision! Is it not the noon of a summer night fragrant with
       the breath of gardens, bright with the beam that lovers love, and soft with the breath of
       Ausonian breezes? Within that sweet and stately residence, dwells there not a maiden fair
       enough to revive chivalry; who is even now thinking of him as she leans on her pensive hand,
       or if perchance she dream, recalls him in her visions? And himself, is he one who would cry
       craven with such a lot! What avail his golden youth, his high blood, his daring and devising
       spirit, and all his stores of wisdom, if they help not now! Does not he feel the energy
       divine that can confront fate and carve out fortunes? Besides it is nigh Midsummer Eve, and
       what should fairies reign for, but to aid such a bright pair as this?  
   as a diver grasps a gem, he recalls the enraptured yet gentle embrace, that had
       sealed upon her blushing cheek his mystical and delicious sovereignty.  
  
  CHAPTER VIII.  
  The morning broke lowering and thunderous; small white clouds, dull and immovable,
       studded the leaden sky; the waters of the rushing Darl seemed to have become black and almost
       stagnant; the terraces of Hellingsley looked like the hard lines of a model; and the mansion
       itself had a harsh and metallic character. Before the chief portal of his Hall, the elder
       Millbank, with an air of some anxiety, surveyed the landscape and the heavens, as if he were
       speculating on the destiny of the day.  
   raised walk before him. The clock of Hellingsley church had given the chimes of
       noon. His son and Coningsby appeared at the end of one of the avenues. His eye lightened; his
       lip became compressed; he advanced to meet them.  
  "Are you going to fish to-day, Oswald?" he inquired of his son.  
  "We had some thoughts of it, sir."  
  "A fine day for sport, I should think," he observed as he turned towards the Hall with
       them.  
  Coningsby remarked the fanciful beauty of the portal; its twisted columns, and Caryatides
       carved in dark oak.  
  "Yes, it's very well," said Millbank, "but I really do not know why I came here; my
       presence is an effort. Oswald does not care for the place; none of us do, I believe."  
  "Oh! I like it now father; and Edith dotes on it."  
  "She was very happy at Millbank," said the father rather sharply.  
  "We are all of us happy at Millbank," said Oswald.  
  "I was much struck with the valley and the whole settlement when I first saw it," said
       Coningsby.  
  "Suppose you go and see about the tackle, Oswald," said Mr. Millbank, "and Mr. Coningsby
       and I will take a stroll on the terrace in the meantime."  
  The habit of obedience which was supreme in this family instantly carried Oswald away,
       though he was rather puzzled why his father should be so particularly anxious about the
       preparation of the fishing tackle, as he very rarely used it. His son had no sooner departed
       than Mr. Millbank turned to Coningsby and said very abruptly.  
   pointing to a chair, he begged his guest to be seated. Both in their chairs,
       Mr. Millbank clearing his throat, said without preface, "I have reason to believe, Mr.
       Coningsby, that you are attached to my daughter."  
  "I have been attached to her for a long time; most ardently," replied Coningsby in a calm
       and rather measured tone, but looking very pale.  
  "And I have reason to believe that she returns your attachment," said Mr. Millbank.  
  "I believe she deigns—not to disregard it," said Coningsby, his white cheek becoming
       scarlet.  
  "It is then a mutual attachment, which if cherished, must produce mutual unhappiness," said
       Mr. Millbank.  
  "I would fain believe the reverse," said Coningsby.  
  "Why?" inquired Mr. Millbank.  
  "Because I believe she possesses every charm, quality and virtue, that can bless man; and
       because, though I can make her no equivalent return, I have a heart, if I know myself, that
       would struggle to deserve her."  
  "I know you to be a man of sense; I believe you to be a man of honour," replied Mr.
       Millbank. "As the first, you must feel that an union between you and my daughter is
       impossible; what then should be your duty as a man of correct principle is obvious."  
  "I could conceive that our union might be attended with difficulties," said Coningsby in a
       somewhat deprecating tone.  
  "Sir, it is impossible," repeated Mr. Millbank interrupting him though not with harshness,
       "that is to say there is no conceivable marriage which could be effected at greater
       sacrifices, and which would occasion greater misery."  
  "The sacrifices are more apparent to me than the misery," said Coningsby, "and even they
       may be imaginary."  
   others. But for these very reasons his hate is more intense. I can afford to
       hate him less than he hates me—I have injured him more. Here are feelings to exist between
       human beings! But they do exist—and now you are to go to this man, and ask his sanction to
       marry my daughter!"  
  "But I would appease these hatreds; I would allay these dark passions, the origin of which
       I know not, but which never could justify the end, and which lead to so much misery. I would
       appeal to my grandfather—I would show him Edith."  
   people, free from all the bad passions of our nature, and ignorant of the
       world's ways. But because they were not noble, because they could trace no mystified descent
       from a foreign invader or the sacrilegious minion of some spoliating despot, their daughter
       was hunted from the family which should have exulted to receive her, and the land of which
       she was the native ornament. Why should a happier lot await you than fell to your parents?
       You are in the same position as your father; you meditate the same act. The only difference
       being aggravating circumstances in your case, which even if I were a member of the same order
       as my Lord Monmouth, would prevent the possibility of a prosperous union. Marry Edith, and
       you blast all the prospects of your life, and entail on her a sense of unceasing humiliation.
       Would you do this? Should I permit you to do this?"  
   he said: "It seems, sir, that you were acquainted with my mother?"  
  "I knew sufficient of her," replied Mr. Millbank with a kindling cheek, "to learn the
       misery that a woman may entail on herself by marrying out of her condition. I have bred my
       children in a respect for their class. I believe they have imbibed my feeling; though it is
       strange how in the commerce of the world, chance, in their friendships, has apparently
       baffled my designs."  
  "Oh! do not say it is chance, sir," said Coningsby looking up, and speaking with much
       fervour. "The feelings that animate me towards your family are not the feelings of chance:
       they are the creation of sympathy; tried by time, tested by thought. And must they perish?
       Can they perish? They were inevitable; they are indestructible. Yes, sir, it is in vain to
       speak of the enmities that are fostered between you and my grandfather; the love that exists
       between your daughter and myself is stronger than all your hatreds."  
   man that is in love," said Mr. Millbank. "This is mere rhapsody; it will vanish
       in an instant before the reality of life. And you have arrived at that reality," he
       continued, speaking with emphasis, leaning over the back of his chair and looking steadily at
       Coningsby with his grey, sagacious eye, "My daughter and yourself can meet no more."  
  "It is impossible you can be so cruel!" exclaimed Coningsby.  
  "So kind; kind to you both; for I wish to be kind to you as well as to her. You are
       entitled to kindness from us all; though I will tell you now, that, years ago, when the news
       arrived that my son's life had been saved, and had been saved by one who bore the name of
       Coningsby, I had a presentiment great as was the blessing, that it might lead to
       unhappiness."  
  "I can answer for the misery of one," said Coningsby, in a tone of great despondency. "I
       feel as if my sun were set. Oh! why should there be such wretchedness! Why are there family
       hatreds and party feuds! Why am I the most wretched of men!"  
  "My good young friend, you will live I doubt not to be a very happy one. Happiness is not
       as we are apt to fancy entirely dependent on these contingencies. It is the lot of most men
       to endure what you are now suffering, and they can look back to such conjunctures through the
       vista of years with calmness."  
  "I may see Edith now?"  
  "Frankly, I should say, no. My daughter is in her room; I have had some conversation with
       her. Of course she suffers not less than yourself. To see her again, will only aggravate woe.
       You leave under this roof, sir, some sad memories, but no unkind ones. It is not likely that
       I can serve you, or that you may want my aid; but whatever may be in my power, remember you
       may command it—without reserve and without restraint. If I control myself now, it is not
       because I do not respect your affliction, but because in the course of my life I have felt
       too much not to be able to command my feelings."  
  "You never could have felt what I feel now," said Coningsby, in a tone of anguish.  
  "You touch on delicate ground," said Millbank, "yet from me you may learn to suffer. There
       was a being once, not less fair than the peerless girl that you would fain call your own, and
       her heart was my proud possession. There were no family feuds to baffle our union, nor was I
       dependent on anything, but the energies which had already made me flourishing. What happiness
       was mine! It was the first dream of my life, and it was the last; my solitary passion, the
       memory of which softens my heart. Ah! you dreaming scholars, and fine gentlemen who saunter
       through life, you think there is no romance in the loves of a man who lives in the toil and
       turmoil of business. You are in deep error. Amid my career of travail, there was ever a
       bright form which animated exertion; inspired my invention, nerved my energy, and to gain
       whose heart and life, I first made many of those discoveries and entered into many of those
       speculations, that have since been the foundation of my wide prosperity.  
   I should bear her to the home that I had proudly prepared for her.  
  "There came a young noble, a warrior who had never seen war, glittering with gew-gaws. He
       was quartered in the town where the mistress of my heart, and who was soon to share my life
       and my fortunes, resided. The tale is too bitter not to be brief. He saw her, he sighed; I
       will hope that he loved her; she gave him with rapture the heart which perhaps she found she
       had never given me; and instead of bearing the name I had once hoped to have called her by,
       she pledged her faith at the altar to one who like you was called—   Coningsby   ."  
  "My mother!"  
  "You see, I too have had my griefs."  
   Hellingsley, where I came to be so happy, where I have been so happy. Nay, let
       me go, dear sir! I must be alone, I must try to think. And tell her—no, tell her nothing. God
       will guard over us!"  
  Proceeding down the avenue with a rapid and distempered step, his countenance lost as it
       were in a wild abstraction, Coningsby encountered Oswald Millbank. He stopped, collected his
       turbulent thoughts, and throwing on Oswald one glance that seemed at the same time to
       communicate woe and to demand sympathy, flung himself into his arms.  
  "My friend!" he exclaimed, and then added in a broken voice, "I need a friend."  
   consolation, by the friend who was devoted to him.  
   to desert in the midst of his lonely and unsolaced woe.  
  "I ought not to enter here," said Oswald holding the hand of Coningsby as he hesitated to
       advance; "and yet there are duties more sacred even than obedience to a father. I cannot
       leave you thus, friend of my best heart!"  
  The morning passed away in unceasing yet fruitless speculation on the future. One moment
       something was to happen, the next nothing could occur. Sometimes a beam of hope flashed over
       the fancy of Coningsby, and jumping up from the turf, on which they were reclining, he seemed
       to exult in his renovated energies; and then this sanguine paroxysm was succeeded by a fit of
       depression so dark and dejected, that nothing but the presence of Oswald seemed to prevent
       Coningsby from flinging himself into the waters of the Darl.  
   that no suspicion might arise in the mind of his father of his having
       accompanied Coningsby home. But just as he was beginning to mention the necessity of his
       departure, a flash of lightning seemed to transfix the heavens. The sky was very dark; though
       studded here and there with dingy sports. The young men sprang up at the same time.  
  "We had better get out of these trees," said Oswald.  
  "We had better get to the Castle," said Coningsby.  
  A clap of thunder that seemed to make the park quake broke over their heads, followed by
       some thick drops. The Castle was close at hand; Oswald had avoided entering it; but the
       impending storm was so menacing, that hurried on by Coningsby he could make no resistance;
       and in a few minutes, the companions were watching the tempest from the windows of a room in
       Coningsby Castle.  
   broke over the Castle as if the keep were rocking with artillery: amid the
       momentary pauses of the explosion, the rain was heard descending like dissolving
       water-spouts.  
  Nor was this one of those transient tempests that often agitate the summer. Time advanced,
       and its fierceness was little mitigated. Sometimes there was a lull, though the violence of
       the rain never appeared to diminish; but then as in some pitched fight between contending
       hosts, when the fervour of the field seems for a moment to allay, fresh squadrons arrive and
       renew the hottest strife, so a low moaning wind that was now at intervals faintly heard, bore
       up a great reserve of electric vapour, that formed as it were into field, in the space
       between the Castle and Hellingsley, and then discharged its violence on that fated
       district.  
  Coningsby and Oswald exchanged looks. "You must not think of going home at present, my dear
       fellow," said the first. "I am sure your father would not be displeased. There is not a being
       here who even knows you, and if they did—what then?"  
  The servant entered the room, and inquired whether the gentlemen were ready for dinner.  
  "By all means; come, my dear, Millbank, I feel reckless as the tempest; let us drown our
       cares in wine!"  
  Coningsby in fact was exhausted by all the agitation of the day, and all the harassing
       spectres of the future. He found wine a momentary solace. He ordered the servants away, and
       for a moment felt a degree of wild satisfaction in the company of the brother of Edith.  
  Thus they sate for a long time, talking only of one subject, and repeating almost the same
       things, yet both felt happier in being together. Oswald had risen, and opening the window,
       examined the approaching night. The storm had lulled, though the rain still fell; in the west
       was a streak of light. In a quarter of an hour, he calculated on departing. As he was
       watching the wind, he thought he heard the sound of wheels, which reminded him of Coningsby's
       promise to lend him a light carriage for his return.  
  They sate down once more; they had filled their glasses for the last time; to pledge to
       their faithful friendship, and the happiness of Coningsby and Edith; when the door of the
       room opened, and there appeared—   Mr. Rigby   .  
  END OF BOOK VII.  
  
  
  BOOK VIII.  
  CHAPTER I.  
  It was the heart of the London season, nearly four years ago; twelve months having
       almost elapsed since the occurrence of those painful passages at Hellingsley which closed the
       last book of this history; and long lines of carriages an hour before midnight, up the
       classic mount of St. James and along Piccadilly, intimated that the world were received at
       some grand entertainment in Arlington Street.  
   beneath whose roof at Beaumanoir we have more than once introduced the reader,
       to gain whose courtyard was at this moment the object of emulous coachmen, and to enter whose
       saloons was to reward the martyr-like patience of their lords and ladies.  
  Among the fortunate, who had already succeeded in bowing to their hostess, were two
       gentlemen, who ensconced in a good position surveyed the scene, and made their observations
       on the passing guests. They were gentlemen, who, to judge from their general air, and the
       great consideration with which they were treated by those who were occasionally in their
       vicinity, were personages whose criticism bore authority.  
   younger than they used to be. Amazing load of young fellows indeed!"  
  At this moment an individual who came under the fortunate designation of a young fellow;
       but whose assured carriage hardly intimated that this was his first season in London, came up
       to the junior of the two critics; and said, "A pretty turn you played us yesterday at
       Whites', Melton. We waited dinner nearly an hour!"  
  "My dear fellow, I am infinitely sorry; but I was obliged to go down to Windsor, and I
       missed the return train. A good dinner? Who had you?"  
  "A capital party, only you were wanted. We had Beaumanoir, and Vere, and Jack Tufton, and
       Spraggs."  
  "Was Spraggs rich?"  
  "Wasn't he! I have not done laughing yet. He told us a story about the little Biron, who
       was over here last year—I knew her at Paris—and an Indian screen. Killing! Get him to tell it
       to you. The richest thing you ever heard!"  
  "Who's your friend?" inquired Mr. Melton's companion, as the young man moved away.  
  "Sir Charles Buckhurst."  
  "A—h! That is Sir Charles Buckhurst. Glad to have seen him. They say he is going it."  
  "He knows what he is about."  
  "Egad, so they all do. A young fellow now of two or three and twenty knows the world as men
       used to do after as many years of scrapes. I wonder where there is such a thing as a
       greenhorn. Effie Crabs says the reason he gives up his house is, that he has cleaned out the
       old generation; and that the new generation would clean him."  
   Lady Everingham is one of their set. I don't know what it is exactly; but I
       think we shall hear more of it."  
  "A sort of Animal Magnetism, or Unknown Tongues, I take it from your description," said his
       companion.  
  "Well, I don't know what it is," said Mr. Melton; "but it has got hold of all the young
       fellows who have just come out. Beau is a little bit himself. I had some idea of giving my
       mind to it; they made such a fuss about it at Everingham; but it requires a devilish deal of
       history I believe, and all that sort of thing."  
  "Ah! that's a bore," said his companion. "It's difficult to turn to with a new thing when
       you are not in the habit of it. I never could manage charades."  
  Mr. Ormsby passing by, stopped, "They told me you had the gout, Cassilis?" he said to Mr.
       Melton's companion.  
   stone pills; sort of a charm I believe, and all that kind of thing; they say it
       rubs the gout out of you. I sent him to Luxborough who was very bad; cured him directly;
       Luxborough swears by him."  
  "Luxborough believes in the Millennium," said Mr. Ormsby.  
  "But here's a new thing that Melton has been telling me of that all the world is going to
       believe in," said Mr. Cassilis, "something patronized by Lady Everingham."  
  "A very good patroness," said Mr. Ormsby.  
  "Have you heard anything about it?" continued Mr. Cassilis. "Young Coningsby brought it
       from abroad, didn't you say so, Jemmy?"  
  "No, no, my dear fellow; it is not at all that sort of thing."  
  "But they say it requires a deuced deal of history," continued Mr. Cassilis. "One must
       brush up one's Goldsmith. Canterton used to be the fellow for history at Whites'. He was
       always boring one with William the Conqueror, Julius Cæsar and all that sort of thing."  
   both sly and solemn, "I should not be surprised if some day or another, we have
       a history about Lady Everingham and young Coningsby."  
  "Poh!" said Mr. Melton, "he is engaged to be married to her sister, Lady Theresa."  
  "The deuce!" said Mr. Ormsby, "well, you are a friend of the family, and I suppose you
       know."  
  "He is a devilish good-looking fellow, that young Coningsby," said Mr. Cassilis. "All the
       women are in love with him, they say. Lady Eleanor Ducie quite raves about him."  
  "By the bye, his grandfather has been very unwell," said Mr. Ormsby, looking
       mysteriously.  
  "I saw Lady Monmouth here just now," said Mr. Melton.  
  "Oh! he is quite well again," said Mr. Ormsby.  
  "Got an odd story at Whites' that Lord Monmouth was going to separate from her," said Mr.
       Cassilis.  
  "No foundation," said Mr. Ormsby, shaking his head.  
   said Mr. Melton, "but I rather think there was a foundation for the
       rumour."  
  Mr. Ormsby still shook his head.  
  "Well," continued Mr. Melton, "all I know is that it was looked upon last winter at Paris
       as a settled thing."  
  "There was some story about some Hungarian," said Mr. Cassilis.  
  "No, that blew over," said Mr. Melton, "it was Trautsmandorff the row was about."  
  All this time Mr. Ormsby, as the friend of Lord and Lady Monmouth, remained shaking his
       head; but as a member of society, who delighted in small scandal, appropriating the gossip
       with the greatest avidity.  
  "I should think old Monmouth was not the sort of fellow who would blow up a woman," said
       Mr. Cassilis.  
  "Provided she would leave him quietly," said Mr. Melton.  
  "Yes, Lord Monmouth never could live with a woman more than two years," said Mr. Ormsby,
       pensively. "And that I thought at the time rather an objection to his marriage."  
  We must now briefly revert to what befell our hero after those unhappy occurrences in the
       midst of whose first woe we left him.  
   of his party. The majority of the Whig Cabinet in the House of Commons by 1840
       had become little more than nominal; and though it was circulated among their friends, as if
       from the highest authority that, "one was enough," there seemed daily a better chance of
       their being deprived even of that magical unit. For the first time in the history of this
       country since the introduction of the system of Parliamentary Sovereignty, the Government of
       England depended on the fate of single elections. And indeed by a single vote, it is
       remarkable to observe, the fate of the Whig government was ultimately decided.  
   or what they were, provided they were diverting.  
  Villebecque had written to Coningsby at Rome by his grandfather's desire to beg him to
       return to England and meet Lord Monmouth there. The letter was couched with all the respect
       and good feeling which Villebecque really entertained for him whom he addressed; still a
       letter on such a subject from such a person was not agreeable to Coningsby, and his reply to
       it was direct to his grandfather; Lord Monmouth however had entirely given over writing
       letters.  
   and accomplished female friend. She gave him every instruction, every
       intimation that was necessary; cleared the social difficulties which in some degree are
       experienced on their entrance into the world even by the most highly connected, unless they
       have this benign assistance; planted him immediately in the position which was expedient;
       took care that he was invited at once to the right houses; and, with the aid of her husband,
       that he should become a member of the right clubs.  
  "And who is to have the blue ribbon, Lord Eskdale?" said the Duchess to that nobleman, as
       he entered and approached to pay his respects.  
  "If I were Melbourne, I would keep it open," replied his Lordship. "It is a mistake to give
       away too quickly."  
  "But suppose they go out?" said her Grace.  
  "Oh! there is always a last day to clear the house. But they will be in another year. The
       cliff will not be sapped before then. We made a mistake last year about the ladies."  
  "I know you always thought so."  
   One should make it a rule to give up to them, and then they are sure to give up
       to us."  
  "You have no great faith in our firmness?"  
  "Male firmness is very often obstinacy; women have always something better, worth all
       qualities; they have tact."  
  "A compliment to the sex from so finished a critic as Lord Eskdale is appreciated."  
  But at this moment the arrival of some guests terminated the conversation, and Lord Eskdale
       moved away, and approached a group which Lady Everingham was enlightening.  
  "My dear Lord Fitz-booby," her Ladyship observed, "in politics we require faith as well as
       in all other things."  
   of yore, when he received a deputation on sugar duties or joint stock banks,
       and when he made, as was his custom when particularly perplexed, an occasional note on a
       sheet of foolscap paper.  
  "An Opposition in an age of Revolution," continued Lady Everingham, "must be founded on
       principles. It cannot depend on mere personal ability and party address taking advantage of
       circumstances. You have not enunciated a principle for the last ten years; and when you
       seemed on the point of acceding to power, it was not on a great question of national
       interest, but a technical dispute respecting the constitution of an exhausted sugar
       colony."  
  "If you are a Conservative party, we wish to know what you want to conserve," said Lord
       Vere.  
  "If it had not been for the Whig Abolition of Slavery," said Lord Fitz-booby goaded into
       repartee, "Jamaica would not have been an exhausted sugar colony."  
  "Then what you do want to conserve is slavery," said Lord Vere.  
  "No," said Lord Fitzbooby, "I am never for retracing our steps."  
  "But will you advance, will you move? And where will you advance, and how will you move?"
       said Lady Everingham.  
  "I think we have had quite enough of advancing," said his Lordship. "I had no idea your
       Ladyship was a member of the Movement party," he added with a sarcastic grin.  
  "But if it were bad, Lord Fitz-booby to move where we are, as you and your friends have
       always maintained, how can you reconcile it to principle to remain there?" said Lord
       Vere.  
  "I would make the best of a bad bargain," said Lord Fitz-booby. "With a Conservative
       government, a reformed Constitution would be less dangerous."  
  "Why?" said Lady Everingham. "What are your distinctive principles that render the peril
       less?  
  "I appeal to Lord Eskdale," said Lord Fitz-booby, "there is Lady Everingham turned quite a
       Radical, I declare. Is not your Lordship of opinion that the country must be safer with a
       Conservative Government than with a Liberal?"  
  "I think the country is always tolerably secure," said Lord Eskdale.  
  Lady Theresa leaning on the arm of Mr. Lyle came up at this moment and unconsciously made a
       diversion in favour of Lord Fitz-booby.  
  "Pray, Theresa," said Lady Everingham, "where is Mr. Coningsby?"  
  Let us endeavour to ascertain. It so happened that on this day Coningsby and Henry Sydney
       dined at Grillion's, at an University club, where among many friends whom Coningsby had not
       met for a long time, and among delightful reminiscences, the unconscious hours stole on. It
       was late when they quitted Grillion's, and Coningsby's brougham was detained for a
       considerable time before its driver could insinuate himself into the line, which indeed he
       would never have succeeded in doing, had not he fortunately come across the coachman of the
       Duke of Agincourt, who being of the same politics as himself, belonging to the same club, and
       always black-balling the same men, let him in from a legitimate party feeling; so they
       arrived in Arlington Street at a very late hour.  
   read her soul; he said something. She changed colour as he addressed her; but
       seemed instantly by an effort to rally and regain her equanimity; replied to his inquiries
       with extreme brevity, and Lady Wallinger's carriage being announced, moved away with the same
       slight haughty salute as before, on the arm of Lord Beaumanoir.  
  
  CHAPTER II.  
   she had really too well regulated a mind, she was in truth a woman of too
       strong an intellect, to neglect any source of occupation and distraction. Her flowers, her
       pencil, and her books, supplied her with these; and music soothed and at times beguiled her
       agitated thoughts. But there was no joy in the house, and in time Mr. Millbank felt it.  
   indeed had been his absence from Hellingsley; unquestionably his presence might
       have prevented the catastrophe. Oswald should have hindered all this. And yet Mr. Millbank
       could not shut his eyes to the devotion of his son to Coningsby. He felt he could count on no
       assistance in this respect from that quarter. Yet how hard upon him that he should seem to
       figure as a despot or a tyrant to his own children whom he loved, when he had absolutely
       acted in an inevitable manner. Edith seemed sad, Oswald sullen, all was changed. All the
       objects for which this clear-headed, strong-minded, kind-hearted man had been working all his
       life, seemed to be frustrated. And why? Because a young man had made love to his daughter,
       who was really in no manner entitled to do so.  
   to their valley. There were more objects of interest: change too is always
       beneficial. If Mr. Millbank had been aware that Oswald had received a letter from Coningsby,
       written before he quitted Spain, perhaps he might have recognised a more satisfactory reason
       for the transient liveliness of his daughter which had so greatly gratified him.  
  About a month after Christmas, the meeting of Parliament summoned Mr. Millbank up to
       London; and he had wished Edith to accompany him. But London in February to Edith, without
       friends or connexions, her father always occupied and absent from her day and night, seemed
       to them all on reflection, to be a life not very conducive to health or cheerfulness, and
       therefore she remained with her brother. Oswald had heard from Coningsby again from Rome; but
       at the period he wrote he did not anticipate his return to England. His tone was
       affectionate, but dispirited.  
   House of Commons; never paired off; never missed a moment of it; worked at
       committees all the morning, listened attentively to debates all the night; always dined at
       Bellamy's when there was a house; and when there was not, liked dining at the Goldsmith's
       Compány, the Russia Company, great Emigration banquets, and other joint-stock festivities.
       That was his idea of rational society; business and pleasure combined; a good dinner, and
       good speeches afterwards.  
   even chance enters too frequently in the league against lovers. The invitation
       to the assembly at—House was therefore peculiarly gratifying to Edith, since she could
       scarcely doubt that if Coningsby were in town, which her casual inquiries of Lord Beaumanoir
       induced her to believe was the case, that he would be present. Never therefore had she
       repaired to an assembly with such a fluttering spirit: and yet there was a fascinating
       anxiety about it that bewilders the young heart.  
  In vain Edith surveyed the rooms to catch the form of that being, whom for a moment she had
       never ceased to cherish and muse over. He was not there; and at the very moment when
       disappointed and mortified she most required solace, she learned from Mr. Melton that Lady
       Theresa Sydney, whom she chanced to admire, was going to be married, and to Mr.
       Coningsby.  
   pathos of their mutual loves! There seemed to be no truth in man, no joy in
       life! All the feelings that she had so generously lavished, all returned upon herself. She
       could have burst into a passion of tears and buried herself in a cloister.  
  Instead of that, civilisation made her listen with a serene though tortured countenance;
       but as soon as it was in her power, pleading a head-ache to Lady Wallinger, she effected, or
       thought she had effected her escape from a scene which harrowed her heart.  
   and whatever were the barriers which the circumstances of life placed against
       their union, they were partakers of the solemn sacrament of an unpolluted heart.  
   and earnest character never emancipate themselves.  
  After musing and meditating again and again over everything that had occurred, Coningsby
       fell asleep when the morning had far advanced, resolved to rise when a little refreshed and
       find out Lady Wallinger, who, he felt sure, would receive him with kindness.  
  Yet it was fated that this step should not be taken, for while he was at breakfast, his
       servant brought him a letter from Monmouth House, apprising him that his grandfather wished
       to see him as soon as possible on urgent business.  
  
  CHAPTER III.  
  Lord Monmouth was sitting in the same dressing-room in which he was first
       introduced to the reader; on the table were several packets of papers that were open and in
       course of reference; and he dictated his observations to Monsieur Villebecque who was writing
       at his left hand.  
  Thus were they occupied, when Coningsby was ushered into the room.  
  "You see, Harry," said Lord Monmouth, "that I am much occupied to-day, yet the business on
       which I wish to communicate with you is so pressing that it could not be postponed." He made
       a sign to Villebecque, and his secretary instantly retired.  
   against a Coningsby. They have thought of you as the fit person, and I have
       approved of the suggestion. You will therefore be the candidate for Darlford with my entire
       sanction and support, and I have no doubt you will be successful. You may be sure I shall
       spare nothing: and it will be very gratifying to me, after being robbed of all our boroughs,
       that the only Coningsby who cares to enter Parliament, should nevertheless be able to do so
       as early as I could fairly desire."  
   Not even for that Divinity or Dæmon for which we all immolate so much! Mighty
       ambition forsooth to succeed to the Rigbys! To enter the House of Commons a slave and a tool;
       to move according to instructions, and to labour for the low designs of petty spirits;
       without even the consolation of being a dupe. What sympathy could there exist between
       Coningsby and the "great Conservative party," that for ten years in an age of revolution had
       never promulgated a principle; whose only intelligible and consistent policy seemed to be an
       attempt, very grateful of course to the feelings of an English Royalist, to revive Irish
       Puritanism; who when in power in 1835 had used that power only to evince their utter
       ignorance of Church principles; and who were at this moment, when Coningsby was formally
       solicited to join their ranks, in open insurrection against the prerogatives of the English
       Monarchy.  
  "Do you anticipate then an immediate Dissolution, sir?" inquired Coningsby after a moment's
       pause.  
   in the autumn; they may tide over another year as Lord Eskdale thinks, and his
       opinion always weighs with me. He is very safe. Tadpole believes they will dissolve at once.
       But whether they dissolve now, or in a month's time, or in the autumn, or next year, our
       course is clear. We must declare our intentions immediately. We must hoist our flag. Monday
       next, there is a great Conservative dinner at Darlford. You must attend it; that will be the
       finest opportunity in the world for you to announce yourself."  
  "Don't you think, sir," said Coningsby, "that such an announcement would be rather
       premature? It is in fact embarking in a contest which may last a year; perhaps more."  
  "What you say is very true," said Lord Monmouth; "no doubt it is very troublesome; very
       disgusting; any canvassing is. But we must take things as we find them. You cannot get into
       Parliament now in the good old gentlemanly way; and we ought to be thankful that this
       interest has been fostered for our purpose."  
   throat as if about to speak, and then gave something like a sigh.  
  "I think you had better be off the day after to-morrow," said Lord Monmouth. "I have sent
       instructions to the steward to do all he can in so short a time, for I wish you to entertain
       the principal people."  
  "You are most kind, you are always most kind to me, dear sir," said Coningsby in a
       hesitating tone, and with an air of great embarrassment; "but, in truth, I have no wish to
       enter Parliament."  
  "What?" said Lord Monmouth.  
  "I feel that I am not yet sufficiently prepared for so great a responsibility as a seat in
       the House of Commons," said Coningsby.  
   There can be no difficulty. All you have got to do is to vote with your party.
       As for speaking, if you have a talent that way; take my advice; don't be in a hurry. Learn to
       know the house; learn the house to know you. If a man be discreet, he cannot enter Parliament
       too soon."  
  "It is not exactly that, sir," said Coningsby.  
  "Then what is it, my dear Harry? You see to-day I have much to do; yet as your business is
       pressing, I would not postpone seeing you an hour. I thought you would have been very much
       gratified."  
  "You mentioned that I had nothing to do but to vote with my party, sir," replied Coningsby.
       "You mean of course by that term what is understood by the Conservative Party?"  
  "Of course; our friends."  
  "I am sorry," said Coningsby, rather pale, but speaking with firmness, "I am sorry that I
       could not support the Conservative party."  
  "By—" exclaimed Lord Monmouth, starting in his chair, "some woman has got hold of him, and
       made him a Whig."  
   scarcely able to repress a smile, serious as the interview was becoming,
       "nothing of the kind, I assure you. No person can be more Anti-Whig."  
  "I don't know what you are driving at, sir," said Lord Monmouth, in a hard, dry tone.  
  "I wish to be frank, sir," said Coningsby, "and am very sensible of your goodness in
       permitting me to speak to you on the subject. What I mean to say is, that I have for a long
       time looked upon the Conservative party as a body who have betrayed their trust; more from
       ignorance I admit than from design; yet clearly a body of individuals totally unequal to the
       exigencies of the epoch; and indeed unconscious of its real character."  
   let the chief power out of the hands of our own order. It was never thought of
       in the time of your great-grandfather, sir. And if a Commoner were for a season permitted to
       be the nominal Premier to do the detail, there was always a secret Committee of great 1688
       Nobles to give him his instructions."  
  "I should be very sorry to see secret Committees of great 1688 Nobles again," said
       Coningsby.  
  "Then what the devil do you want to see?" said Lord Monmouth.  
  "Political Faith," said Coningsby, "instead of Political Infidelity."  
  "Hem!" said Lord Monmouth.  
   the hands of Parliamentary Laymen? Could the Long Parliament have done worse?
       Well then, if it's neither the Crown nor the Church whose rights and privileges this
       Conservative party propose to vindicate, is it your House, the House of Lords, whose powers
       they are prepared to uphold? Is it not notorious that the very man whom you have elected as
       your leader in that House, declares among his Conservative adherents, that henceforth the
       very Assembly that used to furnish those Committees of great Revolution Nobles that you
       mention, is to initiate nothing; and without a struggle is to subside into that undisturbed
       repose which resembles the Imperial tranquillity that secured the frontiers by paying
       tribute."  
   an ample estate with the view of entailing it on you and your issue. You will
       make a conderable alliance; you may marry if you please Lady Theresa Sydney. I hear the
       report with pleasure. Count on my at once entering into any arrangement conducive to your
       happiness."  
  "My dear grandfather, you have ever been to me only too kind and generous."  
   him out you not only gain a vote for the Conservative Cause and our coronet,
       but you crush my foe. Spare nothing for that object; I count on you, boy."  
  "I should grieve to be backward in anything that concerned your interest or your honour,
       sir," said Coningsby with an air of great embarrassment.  
  "I am sure you would, I am sure you would," said Lord Monmouth, in a tone of some
       kindness.  
  "And I feel at this moment," continued Coningsby, "that there is no personal sacrifice
       which I am not prepared to make for them, except one. My interests, my affections, they
       should not be placed in the balance, if yours, sir, were at stake, though there are
       circumstances which might involve me in a position of as much mental distress as a man could
       well endure; but I claim for my convictions, my dear grandfather, a generous tolerance."  
   you mean by sacrifice of affections I don't comprehend; but as for your
       opinions, you have no business to have any other than those I uphold. You are too young to
       form opinions."  
  "I am sure I wish to express them with no unbecoming confidence;" replied Coningsby; "I
       have never intruded them on your ear before; but this being an occasion, when you yourself
       said, sir, I was about to commence my public career, I confess I thought it was my duty to be
       frank; I would not entail on myself long years of mortification by one of those
       ill-considered entrances into political life which so many public men have cause to
       deplore."  
  "You go with your family, sir, like a gentleman; you are not to consider your opinions like
       a philosopher or a political adventurer."  
  "Yes, sir," said Coningsby with animation, "but men going with their families, like
       gentlemen, and losing sight of every principle on which the society of this country ought to
       be established, produced the Reform Bill."  
   never have had the Reform Bill. And Grey would have gone to Ireland."  
  "You are in as great peril now as you were in 1830," said Coningsby.  
  "No, no, no;" said Lord Monmouth, "the Tory party is organized now; they will not catch us
       napping again; these Conservative Associations have done the business."  
   the habit of our lives; let me see Property acknowledging as in the old days of
       faith, that Labour is his twin brother, and that the essence of all tenure is the performance
       of duty; let results such as these be brought about, and let me participate, however feebly,
       in the great fulfilment; and public life then indeed becomes a noble career, and a seat in
       Parliament an enviable distinction."  
   such as he had never before encountered, "who is not prepared to sacrifice all
       the objects of life, for the pursuit of some fantastical puerilities."  
  His Lordship rang a bell on his table for Villebecque, and to prevent any further
       conversation, resumed his papers.  
  
  CHAPTER IV.  
   resplendent visions can be ever realized, and that we add but one more victim
       to the long and dreary catalogue of baffled aspirations.  
  Nor could he indeed by any combination see the means to extricate himself from the perils
       that were encompassing him. There was something about his grandfather that defied persuasion.
       Prone as eloquent youth generally is to believe in the resistless power of its appeals,
       Coningsby despaired at once of ever moving Lord Monmouth. There had been a callous dryness in
       his manner, an unswerving purpose in his spirit, that at once baffled all attempts at
       influence. Nor could Coningsby forget the glance he received when he quitted the room. There
       was no possibility of mistaking it; it said at once, without periphrasis, "Cross my purpose,
       and I will crush you."  
   Lane to call on Lady Everingham. But surely if there were a sacred secret in
       the world, it was the one which subsisted between himself and Edith. No, that must never be
       violated. Then there was Lady Wallinger; he could at least speak with freedom to her. He
       resolved to tell her all. He looked in for a moment at a Club to take up the Court Guide and
       find her direction. A few men were standing in a bow window. He heard Mr. Cassilis say,  
  "So Beau they say is booked at last; the new beauty, have you heard?"  
  "I saw him very sweet on her last night," rejoined his companion. "Has she any tin?"  
  "Deuced deal they say," replied Mr. Cassilis. "The father's a Cotton Lord, and they all
       have loads of tin, you know. Nothing like them now."  
  "He is in Parliament, is not he?"  
  "'Gad I believe he is," said Mr. Cassilis, "I never know who is in Parliament in these
       days. I remember when there were only ten men in the House of Commons who were not either
       members of Brookes' or this place. Everything is so deuced changed."  
  "I hear 'tis an old affair of Beau," said another gentleman. "It was all done a year ago at
       Rome or Paris."  
  "They say she refused him then," said Mr. Cassilis.  
  "Well, that is tolerably cool for a manufacturer's daughter," said his friend, "what
       next?"  
  "I wonder how the Duke likes it," said Mr. Cassilis.  
  "Or the Duchess?" added one of his friends.  
  "Or the Everinghams?" added the other.  
  "The Duke will be deuced glad to see Beau settled, I take it," said Mr. Cassilis.  
  "A good deal depends on the tin," said his friend.  
   nature is capable. All the recollections of the past, all the once cherished
       prospects of the future, blend into one bewildering anguish. Coningsby quitted the Club, and
       mounting his horse, rode rapidly out of town, almost unconscious of his direction. He found
       himself at length in a green lane near Willesden, silent and undisturbed; he pulled up his
       horse and he summoned all his mind to the contemplation of his prospects.  
   that he ever could have been the hero of her romantic girlhood! What
       degradation in the idea! His cheek burnt at the possibility of such ignominy!  
   watching the image of the planets on its fatal waters. The die was cast.  
   to immediate success, is a fatal error. Conscious that he was perhaps verging
       on some painful vicissitudes of his life, he devoted himself to a love that seemed hopeless,
       and to a fame that was perhaps a dream.  
  It was under the influence of these solemn resolutions, that he wrote on his return home, a
       letter to Lord Monmouth, in which he expressed all that affection, which he really felt for
       his grandfather, and all the pangs which it cost him to adhere to the conclusions he had
       already announced. In terms of tenderness and even humility he declined to become a candidate
       for Darlford, or even to enter Parliament except as the master of his own conduct.  
  
  CHAPTER V.  
   carpet of velvet was represented the marriage of Cupid and Psyche.  
  It was about two hours after Coningsby had quitted Monmouth House, and Flora came in, sent
       for by Lady Monmouth, as was her custom to read to her as she was employed with some light
       work.  
  "'Tis a new book of Sue," said Lucretia. "they say it is good."  
  Flora seated by her side read for about a quarter of an hour. Reading was an accomplishment
       which distinguished Flora; but today her voice faultered, her expression was uncertain; she
       seemed but very imperfectly to comprehend her page. More than once Lady Monmouth looked round
       at her with an inquisitive glance. Suddenly Flora stopped and burst into tears.  
  "Oh! madam," she at last exclaimed, "if you would but speak to Mr. Coningsby all might be
       right!"  
  "What is this?" said Lady Monmouth, turning quickly on the sofa, then collecting herself in
       an instant she continued with less abruptness and with more suavity than usual, "tell me,
       Flora, what is it; what is the matter?"  
  "My Lord," sobbed Flora, "has quarrelled with Mr. Coningsby."  
  An expression of eager interest came over the countenance of Lucretia.  
  "Why have they quarrelled?"  
  "I do not know they have quarrelled; it is not perhaps a right term; but my Lord is very
       angry with Mr. Coningsby."  
  "Not very angry I should think, Flora; and about what?"  
  "Oh! very angry, madam," said Flora, shaking her head mournfully, "my Lord told M.
       Villebecque that perhaps Mr. Coningsby would never enter the house again."  
  "Was it to-day!" asked Lucretia.  
  "This morning; Mr. Coningsby has only left this hour or two. He will not do what my Lord
       wishes—about some seat in the Chamber. I do not know exactly what it is; but my Lord is in
       one of his moods of terror; my father is frightened even to go into his room, when he is
       so."  
  "Has Mr. Rigby been here to-day?" asked Lucretia.  
   for Mr. Rigby this morning before Mr. Coningsby came, and he found that Mr.
       Rigby was not in town. That is why I know it."  
  Lady Monmouth rose from her sofa and walked once or twice up and down the room. Then
       turning to Flora, she said, "Go away now; the book is stupid; it does not amuse me. Stop:
       find out all you can for me about the quarrel, before I speak to Mr. Coningsby."  
  Flora quitted the room. Lucretia remained for some time in meditation: then she wrote a few
       lines which she despatched at once to Mr. Rigby.  
  
  CHAPTER VI.  
   achieved. This was always the portion of Mr. Rigby. In the eye of the world he
       had constantly the appearance of being mixed up with high dealings, and negotiations and
       arrangements of fine management; where—as in truth, notwithstanding his splendid livery and
       the airs he gave himself in the servants' hall, his real business in life had ever been—to do
       the dirty work.  
   against that spirit of Reform of which they had alike been victims, supplied
       him with information which nothing but a breach of ministerial duty could have furnished. The
       prophetic peroration as to the irresistible progress of Democracy was almost as powerful as
       one of Rigby's speeches on Aldborough or Amersham. There never was a fellow for giving a good
       hearty kick to the people like Rigby. Himself sprung from the dregs of the populace, this was
       disinterested. What could be more patriotic and magnanimous than his Jeremiads over the fall
       of the Montmorencis and the Crillons, or the possible catastrophe of the Percys and the
       Manners! The truth of all this hullaballoo was that Rigby had a sly pension which, by an
       inevitable association of ideas, he always connected with the maintenance of an Aristocracy.
       All his rigmarole dissertations on the French Revolution were impelled by this secret
       influence; and when he wailed over "la guerre aux châteaux," and moaned like a mandrake over
       Nottingham Castle in flames, the rogue had an eye all the while to Quarter Day!  
   interview with his grandfather, Mr. Rigby found a summons to Monmouth House
       waiting him, and an urgent note from Lucretia begging that he would permit nothing to prevent
       him seeing her for a few minutes before he called on the Marquess.  
  Lucretia, acting on the unconscious intimation of Flora, had in the course of
       four-and-twenty hours obtained pretty ample and accurate details of the cause of contention
       between Coningsby and her husband. She could inform Mr. Rigby not only that Lord Monmouth was
       highly incensed against his grandson; but that the cause of their misunderstanding arose
       about a seat in the House of Commons, and that seat too the one which Rigby had long
       appropriated to himself, and over whose registration he had watched with such affectionate
       solicitude. Lady Monmouth arranged this information like a first-rate artist; and gave it a
       grouping and a colour, which produced the liveliest effect upon her confederate. The
       countenance of Rigby was almost ghastly as he received the intelligence; a grin, half of
       malice, half of terror, played over his features.  
  "I told you to beware of him long ago," said Lady Monmouth. "He is, he has ever been, in
       the way of both of us."  
  "He is in my power," said Rigby; "we can crush him."  
  "How?"  
  "He is in love with the daughter of Millbank, the man who bought Hellingsley."  
  "Hah!" exclaimed Lady Monmouth in a prolonged tone.  
  "He was at Coningsby all last summer hanging about her. I found the younger Millbank quite
       domiciliated at the Castle; a fact of itself which, if known to Lord Monmouth, would ensure
       the lad's annihilation."  
  "And you kept this fine news for a winter campaign, my good Mr. Rigby," said Lady Monmouth
       with a subtile smile. "It was a weapon of service; I give you my compliments."  
  "The time is not always ripe," said Mr. Rigby.  
   in the same position which we then occupied, or believed we should occupy. My
       Lord, though you would scarcely believe it, has a weakness for this boy; and though I by my
       marriage, and you by your zealous ability, have apparently secured a permanent hold upon his
       habits, I have never doubted that when the crisis comes we shall find that the golden fruit
       is plucked by one who has not watched the garden. You take me? There is no reason why we two
       should clash together; we can both of us find what we want; and more securely if we work in
       company."  
  "I trust my devotion to you has never been doubted, dear Madam."  
  "Nor to yourself, dear Mr. Rigby. Go now; the game is before you. Rid me of this Coningsby,
       and I will secure you all that you want. Doubt not me. There is no reason. I want a firm
       ally. There must be two."  
   It must be done at once; I know that the government will dissolve."  
  "So I hear for certain," said Lucretia. "Be sure there is no time to lose. What does he
       want with you to-day?"  
  "I know not; there are so many things."  
  "To be sure: and yet I cannot doubt he will speak of this quarrel. Let not the occasion be
       lost. Whatever his mood, the subject may be introduced. If good, you will guide him more
       easily; if dark, the love for the Hellingsley girl, the fact of the brother being in his
       Castle, drinking his wine, riding his horses, ordering about his servants, you will omit no
       details—a Millbank quite at home at Coningsby will lash him to madness! 'Tis quite ripe. Not
       a word that you have seen me. Go, go, or he may hear that you have arrived. I shall be at
       home all the morning. It will be but gallant, that you should pay me a little visit when you
       have transacted your business. You understand— au revoir!"  
   on the contary, as it seemed to her, are rather stimulated by neglect or
       indifference, provided they are not systematic; and the circumstance of a wife being admired
       by one, who is not her husband, sometimes wonderfully revives the passion or renovates the
       respect of him, who should be devoted to her.  
   which Lord Monmouth might, at the first start, contemplate, Lucretia had
       sufficiently studied his temperament to be convinced that all his energies and all his
       resources would ultimately be devoted to its practical fulfilment. Her original prejudice
       against Coningsby and jealousy of his influence had therefore of late been considerably
       aggravated; and the intelligence that for the first time there was a misunderstanding between
       Coningsby and her husband filled her with excitement and hope. She knew her Lord well enough
       to feel assured that the cause for the displeasure in the present instance could not be a
       light one, she resolved instantly to labour that it should not be transient; and it so
       happened that she had applied for aid in this endeavour to the very individual in whose power
       it rested to accomplish all her desire while in doing so he felt at the same time he was
       defending his own position and advancing his own interests.  
   Lady Monmouth again threw aside the book which more than once she had
       discarded. She paced the room; restless rather than disquieted. She had complete confidence
       in Rigby's ability for the occasion; and with her knowledge of Lord Monmouth's character, she
       could not contemplate the possibility of failure, if the circumstances were adroitly
       introduced to his consideration. Still time stole on; the harassing and exhausting process of
       suspense was acting on her nervous system. She began to think that Rigby had not found the
       occasion favourable for the catastrophe; that Lord Monmouth from apprehension of disturbing
       Rigby and entailing explanations on himself had avoided the necessary communication; that her
       skilful combination for the moment had missed. Two hours had now elapsed, and Lucretia, in a
       state of considerable irritation was about to inquire whether Mr. Rigby were with his
       Lordship, when the door of her boudoir opened, and that gentleman appeared.  
  "How long you have been," exclaimed Lady Monmouth. "Now sit down and tell me what has
       past."  
  Lady Monmouth pointed to the seat which Flora had occupied.  
  "I thank your Ladyship," said Mr. Rigby with a somewhat grave and yet perplexed expression
       of countenance, and seating himself at some little distance from his companion, "but I am
       very well here."  
  There was a pause. Instead of responding to the invitation of Lady Monmouth to communicate,
       with his usual readiness and volubility, Mr. Rigby was silent, and if it were possible to use
       such an expression with regard to such a gentleman, apparently embarrassed.  
  "Well," said Lady Monmouth. "Does he know about the Millbanks?"  
  "Everything," said Mr. Rigby.  
  "And what did he say?"  
  "His Lordship was greatly shocked," replied Mr. Rigby with a pious expression of features.
       "Such monstrous ingratitude! As his Lordship very justly observed, it is impossible to say
       what is going on under my own roof, or to whom I can trust."  
   dare say, my dear Mr. Rigby," said Lady Monmouth.  
  "Lord Monmouth was pleased to say that I possessed his entire confidence," said Mr. Rigby,
       "and that he looked to me in his difficulties."  
  "Very sensible of him. And what is to become of Mr. Coningsby?"  
  "The steps which his Lordship is about to take with reference to his establishment
       generally," said Mr. Rigby, "will allow the connection that at present subsists between that
       gentleman and his noble relative, now that Lord Monmouth's eyes are open to his real
       character, to terminate naturally without the necessity of any formal explanation."  
  "But what do you mean by the steps he is going to take in his establishment generally?"  
  "Lord Monmouth thinks he requires change of scene."  
  "Oh! is he going to drag me abroad again," exclaimed Lady Monmouth with great
       impatience.  
  "Why not exactly," said Mr. Rigby rather demurely.  
  "I hope he is not going again to that dreadful Castle in Lancashire."  
  "Lord Monmouth was thinking that as you were tired of Paris, you might find some of the
       German Baths agreeable."  
  "Why there is nothing that Lord Monmouth dislikes so much as a German bathing place!"  
  "Exactly," said Mr. Rigby.  
  "Then how capricious in him, wanting to go to them!"  
  "He does not want to go to them."  
  "What do you mean, Mr. Rigby," said Lady Monmouth in a lower voice, and looking him full in
       the face with a glance seldom bestowed.  
  There was a churlish and unusual look about Rigby. It was as if malignant, and yet at the
       same time a little frightened, he had screwed himself into doggedness.  
   could for a moment take the liberty of supposing, even if his Lordship did not
       ultimately reach you, that anything like a separation had occurred."  
  "A separation!" said Lady Monmouth.  
  "Quite amicable," said Mr. Rigby. "I would never have consented to interfere in the affair,
       but to secure that most desirable point."  
  "I will see Lord Monmouth at once," said Lucretia rising, her natural pallor aggravated
       into a ghoul-like tint.  
  "His Lordship has gone out," said Mr. Rigby rather stubbornly.  
  "Our conversation, sir, then finishes: I wait his return." She bowed haughtily.  
  "His Lordship will never return to Monmouth House again."  
  Lucretia sprang from the sofa.  
  "Miserable craven!" she exclaimed, "has the cowardly tyrant fled? And he really thinks that
       I am to be crushed by such an instrument as this! Pah! He may leave Monmouth House, but I
       shall not. Begone, sir."  
   said Mr. Rigby, "your Ladyship must allow me to place the circumstances of the
       case fairly before your excellent judgment. Lord Monmouth has decided upon a course; you know
       as well as me that he never swerves from his resolutions. He has left peremptory
       instructions, and he will listen to no appeal. He has empowered me to represent to your
       Ladyship that he wishes in every way to consider your convenience. He suggests that
       everything in short should be arranged as if his Lordship were himself unhappily no more;
       that your Ladyship should at once enter into your jointure, which shall be made payable
       quarterly to your order, provided you can find it convenient to live upon the continent,"
       added Mr. Rigby with some hesitation.  
  "And suppose I cannot?"  
  "Why then we will leave your Ladyship to the assertion of your rights."  
  "We!"  
   countenance gradually regaining its usual callous confidence, and some degree
       of self-complacency, as he remembered the good things which he enumerated.  
  "I have decided," said Lady Monmouth; "I will assert my rights. Your master has mistaken my
       character and his own position. He shall rue the day that he assailed me."  
  "I should be sorry if there were any violence," said Mr. Rigby, "especially as everything
       is left to my management and control. An office indeed which I only accepted for your mutual
       advantage. I think upon reflection I might put before your Ladyship some considerations which
       might induce you on the whole to be of opinion that it will be better for us to draw together
       in this business, as we have hitherto indeed throughout an acquaintance, now of some years."
       Rigby was resuming all his usual tone of brazen familiarity.  
  "Your self-confidence exceeds even Lord Monmouth's estimate of it," said Lucretia.  
   the office. It would have fallen to another, who would have fulfilled it
       without any delicacy and consideration for your feelings. View my interposition in that
       light, my dear Lady Monmouth, and circumstances will assume altogether a new colour."  
  "I beg that you would quit the house, sir."  
   you may naturally experience, but which like everything else, take my word,
       will wear off."  
  "I shall send for Lord Eskdale," said Lady Monmouth, "he is a gentleman."  
  "I am quite sure," said Mr. Rigby, "that Lord Eskdale will give you the same advice as
       myself, if he only reads your Ladyship's letters," he added slowly, "to Prince
       Trautsmandorff."  
  "My letters!" said Lady Monmouth.  
  "Pardon me," said Rigby, putting his hand in his pockets as if to guard some treasure, "I
       have no wish to revive painful associations; but I have them; and I must act upon them, if
       you persist in treating me as a foe, who am in reality your best friend, which indeed I ought
       to be, having the honour of acting as trustee under your marriage settlement, and having
       known you so many years."  
   and yet I cannot help feeling you too will be discharged before he dies."  
  Mr. Rigby made Lady Monmouth a bow such as became the master of the house, and then
       withdrew.  
  
  CHAPTER VII.  
   had for some time been fitting up for him under the superintendence of Mr.
       Rigby, who, as Coningsby also learnt, now permanently resided at Monmouth House. All this
       intelligence made Coningsby ponder. He was sufficiently acquainted with the parties concerned
       to feel assured that he had not learnt the whole truth. What had really taken place, and what
       was the real cause of the occurrences, were equally mystical to him: all he was convinced of
       was, that some great domestic revolution had been suddenly effected.  
   facility, is bewitching. Lord Monmouth was never garrulous: he was always pithy
       and could be picturesque. He revealed a character in a sentence; and detected the ruling
       passion with the hand of a master. Besides he had seen everybody and had done everything; and
       though on the whole too indolent for conversation, and loving to be talked to, these were
       circumstances which made his too rare communications the more precious.  
   the devil Care and all his works. And well it was, that he found such agreeable
       companions, for time flowed on, and no summons arrived to call him to his grandfather's
       presence, and no herald to announce his grandfather's advent. The ladies and Coningsby had
       exhausted badinage; they had examined and criticised all the furniture; had rifled the vases
       of their prettiest flowers; and Clotilde who had already sung several times, was proposing a
       duet to Ermengarde, when a servant entered, and told the ladies that a carriage was in
       attendance to give them an airing, and after that Lord Monmouth hoped they would return and
       dine with him; then turning to Coningsby he informed him with his Lord's compliments, that
       Lord Monmouth was sorry he was too much engaged to see him.  
  Nothing was to be done but to put a tolerably good face upon it. "Embrace Lord Monmouth for
       me," said Coningsby to his fair friends, "and tell him I think it very unkind that he did not
       ask me to dinner with you."  
   He did not wish to be reminded by anything or any person that he had still in
       some degree the misfortune of being a responsible member of society. He wanted to be
       surrounded by individuals who were above or below the conventional interests of what is
       called "the World." He wanted to hear nothing of those painful and embarrassing influences
       which from our contracted experience and want of enlightenment, we magnify into such undue
       importance. For this purpose he wished to have about him persons whose knowledge of the cares
       of life concerned only the means of existence; and whose sense of its objects referred only
       to the sources of enjoyment; persons who had not been educated in the idolatry of
       Respectability; that is to say, of realizing such an amount of what is termed Character by a
       hypocritical deference to the prejudices of the community, as may enable them at suitable
       times, and under convenient circumstances and disguises, to plunder the Public. This was the
       Monmouth Philosophy.  
   and ties of all kinds. He did not wish to be reminded of his identity; but to
       swim unmolested and undisturbed in his Epicurean dream. When therefore his fair visitors,
       Clotilde who opened her mouth only to breathe roses and diamonds; and Ermengarde who was so
       good-natured that she sacrificed even her lovers to her friends; saw him merely to exclaim at
       the same moment, and with the same voices of thrilling joyousness.  
  "Why did not you ask him to dinner!"  
  And then without waiting for his reply entered with that rapidity of elocution which
       Frenchwomen can alone command into the catalogue of his charms and accomplishments, Lord
       Monmouth began to regret that he really had not seen Coningsby who it appears might have
       greatly contributed to the pleasure of the day. The message which was duly given however
       settled the business. Lord Monmouth felt that any chance of explanations or even allusions to
       the past was out of the question; and to defend himself from the accusations of his animated
       guests, he said,  
  "Well, he shall come to dine with you next time."  
  There is no end to the influence of woman on our life. It is at the bottom of everything
       that happens to us. And so it was, that, in spite of all the combinations of Lucretia and Mr.
       Rigby, and the mortification and resentment of Lord Monmouth, the favourable impression he
       casually made on a couple of French actresses occasioned Coningsby, before a month had
       elapsed since his memorable interview at Monmouth House, to receive an invitation again to
       dine with his grandfather.  
   Rigby. Our hero remarked that Villebecque on this occasion sat at the bottom of
       the table, but Flora did not appear.  
   there were relations of intimacy scarcely less inseparable. Coningsby had
       spoken to Lady Everingham of the rumoured marriage of her elder brother, and found, although
       the family had not yet been formally apprised of it, she entertained very little doubt of its
       ultimate occurrence. She admired Miss Millbank with whom her acquaintance continued slight;
       and she wished of course that her brother should marry and be happy, "but Percy is often in
       love," she would add, "and never likes us to be very intimate with his inamoratas. He thinks
       it destroys the romance; and that domestic familiarity may compromise his heroic character.
       However," she added, "I really believe that will be a match."  
   rooms in the Albany, he felt all his desolation; and often a few minutes before
       he figured in the world apparently followed and courted by all, he had been plunged in the
       darkest fits of irremediable wetchedness.  
  He had of course frequently met Lady Wallinger, but their salutations though never omitted
       and on each side cordial, were brief. There seemed to be a tacit understanding between them
       not to refer to a subject fruitful in painful reminiscences.  
  The season waned; in the fulfilment of a project originally formed in the Playing fields of
       Eton, often recurred to at Cambridge, and cherished with the fondness with which men cling to
       a scheme of early youth, Coningsby, Henry Sydney, Vere and Buckhurst, had engaged some moors
       together this year; and in a few days they were about to quit town for Scotland. They had
       pressed Eustace Lyle to accompany them, but he who in general seemed to have no pleasure
       greater than their society had surprised them by declining their invitation, with some vague
       mention that he rather thought he should go abroad.  
  It was the last day of July, and all the world were at a breakfast given, at a fanciful
       cottage, situate in beautiful gardens on the banks of the Thames, by Lady Everingham. The
       weather was as bright as the romances of Boccacio; there were pyramids of strawberries in
       bowls colossal enough to hold orange trees; and the choicest bands filled the air with
       enchanting strains, while a brilliant multitude sauntered on turf like velvet, or roamed in
       desultory existence amid the quivering shades of winding walks.  
  "My fête was prophetic," said Lady Everingham when she saw Coningsby. "I am glad it is
       connected with an incident. It gives it a point."  
  "You are mystical as well as prophetic. Tell me what are we to celebrate."  
  "Theresa is going to be married."  
  "Then I too will prophecy and name the hero of the romance—Eustace Lyle."  
  "You have been more prescient than me," said Lady Everingham, "perhaps because I was
       thinking too much of some one else."  
   time; and when Eustace refused to go to the moors with us, though I said
       nothing, I was convinced."  
  "At any rate," said Lady Everingham sighing with a rather smiling face, "we are kinsfolk
       Mr. Coningsby; though I would gladly have wished to have been more."  
  "Were those your thoughts, dear Lady? Ever kind to me! But such happiness," he added in a
       mournful tone, "I fear can never be mine."  
  "And why?"  
  "Ah! 'tis a tale too strange and sorrowful for a day when like Seged we must all determine
       to be happy."  
  "You have already made me miserable."  
  "Here comes a group that will make you gay," said Coningsby as he moved on. Edith and the
       Wallingers accompanied by Lord Beaumanoir, Mr. Melton and Sir Charles Buckhurst formed the
       party. They seemed profuse in their congratulations to Lady Everingham, having already learnt
       the intelligence from her brother.  
   and Clara Isabella who ought to have been there, had each secured the right
       man. But Adelaide Victoria had now appeared, and Lady St. Julians had a great regard for the
       favourite grandson of Lord Monmouth, and also for the influential friend of Lord Vere and Sir
       Charles Buckhurst. In case Coningsby did not determine to become her son-in-law himself, he
       might counsel either of his friends to a judicious decision on an inevitable act.  
  "Strawberries and cream?" said Lord Eskdale to Mr. Ormsby who seemed occupied with some
       delicacies.  
  "Egad! no, no, no; those days are passed. I think there is a little easterly wind with all
       this fine appearance."  
  "I am for in-door nature myself," said Lord Eskdale. "Do you know I don't half like the way
       Monmouth is going on. He never gets out of that villa of his. He should change his air more.
       Tell him."  
  "It's no use telling him anything. Have you heard anything of Miladi?"  
   and yet I never thought it would last as long."  
  "I gave them two years," said Mr. Ormsby, "Lord Monmouth lived with his first wife two
       years. And afterwards with the Mirandola at Milan, at least nearly two years, it was a year
       and ten months. I must know, for he called me in to settle affairs. I took the lady to the
       Baths of Lucca on the pretence that Monmouth would meet us there. He went to Paris. All his
       great affairs have been two years. I remember I wanted to bet Cassilis at White's on it when
       he married, but I thought being his intimate friend, the oldest friend he has indeed, and one
       of his trustees, it was perhaps as well not to do it."  
  "You should have made the bet with himself," said Lord Eskdale, "and then there never would
       have been a separation."  
  "Hah, hah, hah! Do you know I feel the wind."  
   lady was enchanting. Coningsby was about to pass with some slight courtesy, but
       Lady Wallinger stopped and would speak to him: on very slight subjects; the weather and the
       fête; but yet enough adroitly managed to make him turn and join her. Mrs. Guy Flouncey walked
       on a little before with her Russian admirer. Lady Wallinger followed with Coningsby.  
  "The match that has been proclaimed today has greatly surprised me," said Lady
       Wallinger.  
  "Indeed!" said Coningsby, "I confess I was long prepared for it. And it seems to me the
       most natural alliance conceivable and one that every one must approve."  
  "Lady Everingham seems very much surprised at it."  
  "Ah! Lady Everingham is a very brilliant personage, and cannot deign to observe obvious
       circumstances."  
  "Do you know, Mr. Coningsby, that I always thought you were engaged to Lady Theresa?"  
  "I!"  
   ago, that you were positively going to be married to her."  
  "I am not one of those who can shift their affections with such rapidity, Lady
       Wallinger."  
  Lady Wallinger looked distressed. "You remember our meeting you on the stairs at —House,
       Mr. Coningsby."  
  "Painfully. It is deeply graven on my brain."  
  "Edith had just been informed that you were going to be married to Lady Theresa."  
  "Not surely by him to whom she is herself going to be married," said Coningsby
       reddening.  
  "I am not aware that she is going to be married to any one. Lord Beaumanoir admires her;
       has always admired her. But Edith has given him no encouragement, at least gave him no
       encouragement as long as she believed—but why dwell on such an unhappy subject, Mr.
       Coningsby. I am to blame, I have been to blame perhaps before, but indeed I think it cruel,
       very cruel that Edith and you are kept asunder."  
   friend; and are the most amiable and admirable of women. But tell me, is it
       indeed true that Edith is not going to be married?"  
  At this moment Mrs. Guy Flouncey turned round, and assuring Lady Wallinger that the Prince
       and herself had agreed to refer some point to her about the most transcendental ethics of
       flirtation, this deeply interesting conversation was arrested, and Lady Wallinger with
       becoming suavity was obliged to listen to the lady's lively appeal of exaggerated nonsense,
       and the Prince affected protests, while Coningsby walked by her side pale and agitated, and
       then offered his arm to Lady Wallinger which she accepted with an affectionate pressure. At
       the end of the terrace they met some other guests, and soon were immersed in the multitude
       that thronged the lawn.  
   resolute enough to try a fall with the Marquess, was impelled by his talent for
       action to enter the lists. He had talked down everybody, unhorsed every cavalier. Nobody had
       a chance against him; he answered all your questions before you asked them; contradicted
       everybody with the intrepidity of a Rigby; annihilated your anecdotes by historiettes
       infinitely more piquant; and if anybody chanced to make a joke which he could not excel,
       declared immediately that it was a Joe Miller. He was absurd, extravagant, grotesque, noisy;
       but he was young, rattling, and interesting from his health and spirits. Edith was extremely
       amused by him; and was encouraging by her smile his spiritual excesses, when they all
       suddenly met Lady Wallinger and Coningsby.  
  The eyes of Edith and Coningsby met for the first time since they so cruelly encountered on
       the staircase of—House. A deep, quick blush suffused her face; her eyes gleamed with a sudden
       corruscation; suddenly and quickly she put forth her hand.  
   yet which may never be his! It seemed that for the ravishing delight of that
       moment, he could have borne with cheerfulness all the dark and harrowing misery of the year
       that had past away since he embraced her in the woods of Hellingsley, and pledged his faith
       by the waters of the rushing Darl.  
  He seized the occasion which offered itself, a moment to walk by her side, and to snatch
       some brief instants of unreserved communion.  
  "Forgive me!" she said.  
  "Ah! how could you ever doubt me!" said Coningsby.  
  "I was unhappy."  
  "And now we are to each other as before?"  
  "And will be; come what come may."  
  
  
  BOOK IX.  
  CHAPTER I.  
   man. All day long, carts laden with fuel and warm raiment were traversing the
       various districts, distributing comfort and dispensing cheer. For a Christian gentleman of
       high degree was Eustace Lyle.  
  Within his hall too he holds his revel, and his beauteous bride welcomes their guests from
       her noble parents to the faithful tenants of the house. All classes are mingled in the joyous
       equality that becomes the season, at once sacred and merry. There are carols for the eventful
       Eve, and mummers for the festive Day.  
  The Duke and Duchess and every member of the family had consented this year to keep their
       Christmas with the newly married couple. Coningsby too was there, and all his friends. The
       party was numerous, gay, hearty and happy; for they were all united by sympathy.  
   this celebration of Christmas had diffused throughout a very extensive
       district, was a fresh argument in favour of Lord Henry's principle, that a mere mechanical
       mitigation of the material necessities of the humbler classes, a mitigation which must
       inevitably be very limited, can never alone avail sufficiently to ameliorate their condition;
       that their condition is not merely "a knife and fork question," to use the coarse and shallow
       phrase of the Utilitarian school; that a simple satisfaction of the grosser necessities of
       our nature will not make a happy people; that you must cultivate the heart as well as seek to
       content the belly; and that the surest means to elevate the character of the people is to
       appeal to their affections.  
   and the son of one of the noblest of our houses, to whom the delights of life
       are offered with fatal facility, on the very threshold of his career, he devoted his time and
       thought, labour and life, to one vast and noble purpose, the elevation of the condition of
       the great body of the people.  
  "I vote for Buckhurst being Lord of Misrule," said Lord Henry, "I will be content with
       being his Gentleman Usher.  
  "It shall be put to the vote," said Lord Vere.  
  "No one has a chance against Buckhurst," said Coningsby.  
  "Now, Sir Charles," said Lady Everingham, "your absolute sway is about to commence. And
       what is your will."  
   canticle. Lord Everingham shall be Marshal of the lists, and put all in the
       stocks who are found sober and decorous. Lyle shall be the palmer from the Holy Land, and
       Vere shall ride the Hobby-horse. Some must carry cups of Hippocrass; some lighted tapers; all
       must join in chorus."  
  He ceased his instructions and all hurried away to carry them into effect. Some hastily
       arrayed themselves in fanciful dresses, the ladies in robes of white with garlands of
       flowers, some drew pieces of armour from the wall, and decked themselves with helm and
       hauberk, others waved ancient banners. They brought in the Boar's head on a large silver
       dish, and Coningsby raised it aloft. They formed into procession, the Duchess distributing
       rosemary, Buckhurst swaggering with all the majesty of Tamerlane, his mock court irresistibly
       humorous with their servility, and the sweet voice of Lady Everingham chaunting the first
       verse of the Canticle, followed in the second by the rich tones of Lady Theresa.  
  
  I.  
  Caput Apri defero  
  Reddens laudes Bomino  
  The Boar's heade in hande bring I,  
  With garlandes gay and rosemary,  
  I pray you all singe merrily,  
  Qui estis in conbibio.  
  II.  
  Caput Apri defero  
  Reddens laudes Bomino  
  The Boar's head I understande  
  Is the chief serbyee in this lande  
  Loke whereeber it be fande  
  Serbite cum cantico.  
  
   nonsense, when a servant approached Coningsby and told him that he was wanted
       without.  
  Our hero retired unperceived. A despatch had arrived for him from London. Without any
       prescience of its purpose, he nevertheless broke the seal with a trembling hand. His presence
       was immediately desired in town—Lord Monmouth was dead.  
  
  CHAPTER II.  
  This was a crisis in the life of Coningsby; yet, like many critical epochs, the
       person most interested in it was not sufficiently aware of its character. The first feeling
       which he experienced at the intelligence was sincere affliction. He was fond of his
       grandfather; had received great kindness from him, and at a period of life when it was most
       welcome. The neglect and hardships of his early years, instead of leaving a prejudice against
       one who by some might be esteemed their author, had only rendered by their contrast Coningsby
       more keenly sensible of the solicitude and enjoyment which had been lavished on his happy
       youth.  
   during his excursion to the moors, and his various visits to the country, had
       continued at intervals to write to his grandfather, as had been for some years his custom. On
       the whole, with an indefinite feeling which, in spite of many a rational effort, did
       nevertheless haunt his mind, that this great and sudden event might exercise a very vast and
       beneficial influence on his worldly position, Coningsby could not but feel some consolation
       in the affliction which he sincerely experienced, in the hope that he might at all events now
       offer to Edith a home worthy of her charms, her virtues, and her love.  
  Although he had not seen her since their hurried yet sweet reconciliation in the gardens of
       Lady Everingham, Coningsby was never long without indirect intelligence of the incidents of
       her life; and the correspondence between Lady Everingham and Henry Sydney, while they were at
       the moors, had apprised him that Lord Beaumanoir's suit had terminated unsuccessfully almost
       immediately after his brother had quitted London.  
   who was one of Lord Monmouth's executors; and he persuaded Coningsby, whom he
       saw depressed, to dine with him alone.  
  "You should not be seen at a Club," said the good-natured peer; "and I remember myself in
       old days what was the wealth of an Albanian larder."  
  Lord Eskdale at dinner talked very frankly of the disposition of Lord Monmouth's property.
       He spoke as a matter of course that Coningsby was his grandfather's principal heir.  
   your money, and if you ask them for it again, they go about town saying you are
       a Screw."  
  Lord Monmouth had died suddenly at his Richmond villa, which latterly he never quitted, at
       a little supper; with no persons near him but those who were very amusing. He suddenly found
       he could not lift his glass to his lips, and being extremely polite waited a few minutes
       before he asked Clotilde, who was singing a very sparkling drinking song, to do him that
       service. When in accordance with his request she reached him, it was too late. The ladies
       shrieked, being very frightened: at first they were in despair, but after reflection, they
       evinced some intention of plundering the house. Villebecque who was absent at the moment
       arrived in time; and every body became orderly and broken-hearted.  
   movements. After the funeral, the will was to be read in the principal saloon
       of Monmouth House, one of those gorgeous apartments that had excited the boyish wonder of
       Coningsby on his first visit to that paternal roof, and now hung in black adorned with the
       escutcheon of the deceased peer.  
  The testamentary dispositions of the late Lord were still unknown, though the names of his
       executors had been announced by his family solicitor, in whose custody the will and codicils
       had always remained. The executors under the will were Lord Eskdale, Mr. Ormsby, and Mr.
       Rigby. By a subsequent appointment, Sidonia was added. All these individuals were now
       present. Coningsby, who had been chief mourner, stood on the right hand of the solicitor, who
       sat at the end of a long table, round which in groups were ranged all who had attended the
       funeral, including several of the superior members of the household; among them M.
       Villebecque.  
   will however changed or modified had never been revoked; it was therefore
       necessary to commence by reading that instrument. So saying he sate down, and breaking the
       seals of a large packet, he produced the will of Philip Augustus, Marquess of Monmouth, which
       had been retained in his custody since its execution.  
  By this will, of the date of 1829, the sum of ten thousand pounds was left to Coningsby,
       then unknown to his grandfather; the same sum to Mr. Rigby. There were a great number of
       legacies, none of inferior amount, most of them of a less; these were chiefly left to old
       male companions and women in various countries. There was an almost inconceivable number of
       small annuities to faithful servants, decayed actors, and obscure foreigners. The residue of
       his personal estate was left to four gentlemen; three of whom had quitted this world before
       the legator; the bequests therefore had lapsed. The fourth residuary legatee, in whom
       according to the terms of the will all would have consequently centred was Mr. Rigby.  
   materially effect the previous disposition; one of them leaving a legacy of
       £20,000 to the Princess Colonna; until they arrived at the latter part of the year 1832, when
       a codicil increased the £10,000 left under the will to Coningsby to £50,000.  
  After Coningsby's visit to the Castle in 1836 a very important change occurred in the
       disposition of Lord Monmouth's estate. The legacy of £50,000 in his favour was revoked, and
       the same sum left to the Princess Lucretia. A similar amount was bequeathed to Mr. Rigby; and
       Coningsby was left sole residuary legatee.  
   under this instrument that Sidonia had been appointed an executor, and to whom
       Lord Monmouth left, among others, his celebrated picture of the Holy Family by Murillo, as
       his friend had often admired it. To Lord Eskdale he left all his female miniatures, and to
       Mr. Ormsby his rare and splendid collection of French novels, and all his wines, except his
       Tokay, which he left, with his library to Sir Robert Peel; though this legacy was afterwards
       revoked in consequence of Sir Robert's conduct about the Irish Corporations.  
   funeral, nor had he as yet exchanged any recognition with Coningsby.  
  "Now, gentlemen," said the solicitor, "if you please I will proceed."  
  They came to the year 1839, the year Coningsby was at Hellingsley. This appeared to be a
       very critical period in the fortunes of Lady Monmouth; while Coningsby's reached to the
       culminating point. Mr. Rigby was reduced to his original legacy under the will of £10,000; a
       sum of equal amount was bequeathed to Armand Villebecque in acknowledgment of faithful
       services; all the disposition in favour of Lady Monmouth were revoked, and she was limited to
       her moderate jointure of £3,000 per annum, under the marriage settlement; while everything
       without reserve was left absolutely to Coningsby.  
   been placed in the vestibule at Coningsby Castle, from the amiable motive that
       after Lord Monmouth's decease Mr. Rigby might wish perhaps to present it to some other
       friend.  
  Lord Eskdale and Mr. Ormsby took care not to catch the eye of Mr. Rigby. As for Coningsby
       he saw nobody. He maintained during the extraordinary situation in which he was placed a firm
       demeanour; but serene and regulated as he appeared to the spectators, his nerves were really
       strung to a high pitch.  
   Monmouth leave his money? However he might cut and carve up his fortunes,
       Rigby, and especially at a moment when he had so served him, must come in for a considerable
       slice.  
  His prescient mind was right. All the dispositions in favour of "my grandson Harry
       Coningsby" were revoked; and he inherited from his grandfather only the interest of the sum
       of £10,000 which had been originally bequeathed to him in his orphan boyhood. The executors
       had the power of investing the principal in any way they thought proper for his advancement
       in life, provided always it was not placed in "the capital stock of any manufactory."  
   these conventional calamities; a natural and sacred confidence in his youth and
       health, and knowledge and convictions. Even the recollection of Edith was not unaccompanied
       with some sustaining associations. At least the mightiest foe to their union was
       departed.  
  All this was the impression of an instant, simultaneous with the reading of the words of
       form with which the last testamentary disposition of the Marquess of Monmouth left the sum of
       £30,000 to Armand Villebecque; and all the rest, residue, and remainder of his unentailed
       property wheresoever and whatsoever it might be, amounting in value to nearly a million
       sterling, was given devised and bequeathed to Flora, commonly called Flora Villebecque, the
       step-child of the said Armand Villebecque, "but who is my natural daughter by Marie Estelle
       Matteau, an actress at the Théâtre Français in the years 1811-15 by the name of Stella."  
  
  CHAPTER III.  
  "   This   is a crash," said Coningsby with a grave rather than agitated countenance
       to Sidonia, as his friend came up to greet him without however any expression of
       condolence.  
  "This time next year, you will not think so," said Sidonia.  
  Coningsby shrugged his shoulders.  
  "The principal annoyance of this sort of miscarriage," said Sidonia, "is the condolence of
       the gentle world. I think we may now depart. I am going home to dine. Come and discuss your
       position. For the present we will not speak of it." So saying Sidonia good-naturedly got
       Coningsby out of the room.  
  They walked together to Sidonia's house in Carlton Gardens, neither of them making the
       slightest allusion to the catastrophe; Sidonia inquiring where he had been, what he had been
       doing, since they last met, and himself conversing in his usual vein, though with a little
       more feeling in his manner than was his custom. When they had arrived there, Sidonia ordered
       their dinner instantly, and during the interval between the command and its appearance, he
       called Coningsby's attention to an old German painting he had just received, its brilliant
       colouring and quaint costumes.  
  "Eat, and an appetite will come," said Sidonia, when he observed Coningsby somewhat
       reluctant. "Take some of that Chablis; it will put you right; you will find it
       delicious."  
  In this way some twenty minutes past; their meal was over, and they were alone
       together.  
  "I have been thinking all this time of your position," said Sidonia.  
  "A sorry one, I fear," said Coningsby.  
   but not a calamity. If you had lost your eye it would have been a calamity: no
       combination of circumstances could have given you another. There are really no miseries
       except natural miseries: conventional misfortunes are mere illusions. What seems
       conventionally in a limited view a great misfortune, if subsequently viewed in its results,
       is often the happiest incident in one's life."  
  "I hope the day may come when I may feel this."  
  "Now is the moment when philosophy is of use; that is to say, now is the moment when you
       should clearly comprehend the circumstances which surround you. Holiday philosophy is mere
       idleness. You think, for example, that you have just experienced a great calamity, because
       you have lost the fortune on which you counted?"  
  "I must say I do."  
  "I ask you again: which would you have rather lost, your grandfather's inheritance or your
       right leg?"  
  "Most certainly my inheritance."  
  "Or your left arm?"  
  "Still the inheritance."  
  "Would you have received the inheritance on condition, that your front tooth should have
       been knocked out."  
  "No; certainly not."  
  "Would you have given up a year of your life for that fortune trebled?"  
  "Even at twenty-three, I would have refused the terms."  
  "Come, come, Coningsby, the calamity cannot be very great."  
  "Why you have put it in a very ingenious point of view; and yet it is not easy to convince
       a man that he should be content who has lost everything."  
  "You have a great many things at this moment that you separately prefer to the fortune that
       you have forfeited. How then can you be said to have lost everything?"  
  "What have I?" said Coningsby, despondingly.  
   fortune; the combination ought to command the highest."  
  "You console me," said Coningsby, with a faint blush and a fainter smile.  
  "I teach you the truth. That is always solacing. I think you are a most fortunate young
       man; I should not have thought you more fortunate if you had been your grandfather's heir;
       perhaps less so. But I wish you to comprehend your position: if you understand it, you will
       cease to lament."  
  "But what should I do?"  
   you can. You have nothing to haunt your thoughts, or disturb the abstraction of
       your studies. You have seen the most beautiful women; you have banquetted in palaces; you
       know what heroes and wits and statesmen are made of; and you can draw on your memory instead
       of your imagination for all those dazzling and interesting objects that make the
       inexperienced restless, and are the cause of what are called scrapes. But you can do nothing
       if you be in debt. You must be free. Before therefore we proceed, I must beg you to be frank
       on this head. If you have any absolute or contingent incumbrances, tell me of them without
       reserve, and permit me to clear them at once to any amount. You will sensibly oblige me in so
       doing: because I am interested in watching your career, and if the racer start with a clog my
       psychological observations will be imperfect."  
   without end which I must sell, and money at Drummond's."  
   don't look excited. I am hardly surprised. In your position, it would not
       satisfy me. A Diplomatist is after all a phantom. There is a want of nationality about his
       being. I always look upon Diplomatists as the Hebrews of politics; without country, political
       creeds, popular convictions, that strong reality of existence which pervades the career of an
       eminent citizen in a free and great country."  
  "You read my thoughts," said Coningsby. "I should be sorry to sever myself from
       England."  
   I have before mentioned, because it will be sustained by your experience."  
  "I have resolved," said Coningsby; "I will try for the Great Seal."  
  
  CHAPTER IV.  
   fortunes, he must immolate his first and enduring love. Before, he had a
       perilous position to offer Edith; now he had none. The future might then have aided them;
       there was no combination which could improve his present. Under any circumstances, he must
       after all his thought and studies, commence a new novitiate, and before he could enter the
       arena, must pass years of silent and obscure preparation. 'Twas very bitter. He looked up,
       his eye caught that drawing of the towers of Hellingsley which she had given him in the days
       of their happy hearts. That was all that was to remain of their loves. He was to bear it to
       the future scene of his labours, to remind him through revolving years of toil and routine,
       that he too had had his romance, had roamed in fair gardens, and whispered in willing ears
       the secrets of his passion. That drawing was to become the altar piece of his life.  
   gloomy day, a raw north-easter blowing up the cloisters of the Albany, in which
       the fog was lingering, the newspaper on his breakfast table full of rumoured particulars of
       his grandfather's will, which had of course been duly digested by all who knew him: What a
       contrast to St. Geneviève! To the bright bracing morn of that merry Christmas! That radiant
       and cheerful scene, and those gracious and beaming personages, seemed another world and order
       of beings to the one he now habited and the people with whom he must now commune. The Great
       Seal indeed! It was the wild excitement of despair, the frenzied hope that blends inevitably
       with absolute ruin, that could alone have inspired such a hallucination! His unstrung heart
       deserted him. His energies could rally no more. He gave orders that he was at home to no one;
       and in his dressing gown and slippers, with his feet resting on the fire-place, the once
       high-souled and noble-hearted Coningsby delivered himself up to despair.  
   precious than blood. You must give men new ideas, you must teach them new
       words, you must modify their manners, you must change their laws, you must root out
       prejudices, subvert convictions, if you wish to be great. Greatness no longer depends on
       rentals; the world is too rich; nor on pedigrees; the world is too knowing.  
  "The greatness of this city destroys my misery," said Coningsby, "and my genius shall
       conquer its greatness!"  
  This conviction of power in the midst of despair was a revelation of intrinsic strength. It
       is indeed the test of a creative spirit. From that moment all petty fears for an ordinary
       future quitted him. He felt that he must be prepared for great sacrifices, for infinite
       suffering; that there must devolve on him a bitter inheritance of obscurity, struggle, envy
       and hatred, vulgar prejudice, base criticism, petty hostilities, but the dawn would break,
       and the hour arrive, when the welcome morning hymn of his success and his fame would sound
       and be re-echoed.  
   He slept the deep sleep of a man void of anxiety; that has neither hope nor
       fear to haunt his visions, but is prepared to rise on the morrow collected for the great
       human struggle.  
  And the morrow came. Fresh, vigorous, not rash or precipitate, yet determined to lose no
       time in idle meditation, Coningsby already resolved at once to quit his present residence was
       projecting a visit to some legal quarter, where he intended in future to reside, when his
       servant brought him a note. The handwriting was feminine. The note was from Flora. The
       contents were brief. She begged Mr. Coningsby with great earnestness to do her the honour and
       the kindness of calling on her at his earliest convenience, at the hotel in Brook Street
       where she now resided.  
  It was an interview which Coningsby would rather have avoided; yet it seemed to him, after
       a moment's reflection, neither just nor kind, nor manly to refuse her request. Flora had not
       injured him. She was after all his kin. Was it for a moment to be supposed that he was
       envious of her lot? He replied, therefore, that in an hour he would wait upon her.  
  In an hour then two individuals are to be brought together, whose first meeting was held
       under circumstances most strangely different. Then Coningsby was the patron, a generous and
       spontaneous one, of a being obscure, almost friendless, and sinking under bitter
       mortification. His favour could not be the less appreciated because he was the chosen
       relative of a powerful noble. That noble was no more; his vast inheritance had devolved on
       the disregarded, even despised actress, whose suffering emotions Coningsby had then soothed,
       and whose fortune had risen on the destruction of all his prospects, and the baulk of all his
       aspirations.  
  Flora was alone when Coningsby was ushered into the room. The extreme delicacy of her
       appearance was increased by her deep mourning, and seated in a cushioned chair, from which
       she seemed to rise with an effort, she certainly presented little of the character of a
       fortunate and prosperous heiress.  
  "You are very good to come to me," she said, faintly smiling.  
   in which she placed her own, looking down much embarrassed.  
  "You have an agreeable situation here," said Coningsby, trying to break the first
       awkwardness of their meeting.  
  "Yes; but I hope not to stay here long."  
  "You are going abroad?"  
  "No; I hope never to leave England!"  
  There was a slight pause; and then Flora sighed and said:  
  "I wish to speak to you on a subject that gives me pain; yet of which I must speak. You
       think I have injured you?"  
  "I am sure," said Coningsby in a tone of great kindness, "that you could injure no
       one."  
  "I have robbed you of your inheritance."  
  "It was not mine by any right legal or moral. There were others who might have urged an
       equal claim to it; and there are many who will now think that you might have preferred a
       superior one."  
   not say, that they have at least injured you."  
  "We will care not what they say," said Coningsby, "I can sustain my lot."  
  "Would that I could mine!" said Flora. She sighed again with a downcast glance. Then
       looking up embarrassed and blushing deeply, she added: "I wish to restore to you that fortune
       of which I have unconsciously and unwillingly deprived you."  
  "The fortune is yours, dear Flora, by every right;" said Coningsby much moved; "and there
       is no one who wishes more fervently, that it may contribute to your happiness than I do."  
   purpose; I have not lived in vain; I have returned to you some service, however
       humble, for all your—goodness to me in my unhappiness."  
  "You are, as I have ever thought you, the kindest and most tender-hearted of beings. But
       you misconceive our mutual positions, my gentle Flora. The custom of the world does not
       permit such acts to either of us as you contemplate. The fortune is yours. It is left you by
       one on whose affections you had the highest claim. I will not say that so large an
       inheritance does not bring with it an alarming responsibility; but you are not unequal to it.
       Have confidence in yourself. You have a good heart; you have good sense; you have a
       well-principled being. Your spirit will mount with your fortunes, and blend with them. You
       will be happy."  
  "And you?"  
  "I shall soon learn to find content, if not happiness, from other sources," said Coningsby;
       "and mere riches, however vast, could at no time have secured my felicity."  
   "You had some views in life which displeased him who has done all this; they
       may be, they must be, affected by this fatal caprice. Speak to me, for I cannot speak, dear
       Mr. Coningsby; do not let me believe that I, who would sacrifice my life for your happiness,
       am the cause of such calamities!"  
  "Whatever be my lot, I repeat I can sustain it," said Coningsby with a cheek of
       scarlet.  
  "Ah! he is angry with me," exclaimed Flora, "he is angry with me," and the tears stole down
       her pale cheek.  
  "No, no, no, dear Flora; I have no other feelings to you but those of affection and
       respect," and Coningsby much agitated drew his chair nearer to her and took her hand. "I am
       gratified by these kind wishes, though they are utterly impracticable; but they are the
       witnesses of your sweet disposition and your noble spirit. There never shall exist between
       us, under any circumstances, other feelings but those of kin and kindness."  
  He rose as if to depart. When she saw that, she started, and seemed to summon all her
       energies.  
  "You are going," she exclaimed, "and I have said nothing, I have said nothing. And I shall
       never see you again. Let me tell you what I mean. This fortune is yours; it must be yours. It
       is an arrow in my heart. Do not think I am speaking from a momentary impulse. I know myself.
       I have lived so much alone; I have had so little to deceive or to delude me; that I know
       myself, If you will not let me do justice, you declare my doom. I cannot live if my existence
       is the cause of all your prospects being blasted, and the sweetest dreams of your life being
       defeated. When I die, these riches will be yours; that you cannot prevent. Refuse my present
       offer, and you seal the fate of that unhappy Flora, whose fragile life has hung for years on
       the memory of your kindness."  
   that will always interest me, for I shall ever be your friend. You have
       conferred on me one of the most delightful of feelings—gratitude, and for that I bless you. I
       will soon see you again." Mournfully he bade her farewell.  
  
  CHAPTER V.  
  About a week after this interview with Flora, as Coningsby one morning was about
       to sally forth from the Albany to visit some chambers in the Temple to which his notice had
       been attracted, there was a loud ring, a bustle in the hall, and Henry Sydney and Buckhurst
       were ushered in.  
   younger son, could offer little but sympathy, but he declared that it was his
       intention also to study for the Bar, so they should not be divided. Buckhurst after many
       embraces, and some ordinary talk, took Coningsby aside, and said, "My dear fellow, I have no
       objection to Henry Sydney hearing everything I say; but still these are subjects which men
       like to be discussed in private. Of course I expect you to share my fortune. There is enough
       for both. We will have an exact division."  
  There was something in Buckhurst's servent resolution very loveable and a little humorous,
       just enough to put one in a good temper with human nature and life. If there were any
       fellow's fortune in the world that Coningsby would share, Buckhurst's would have had the
       preference, but while he pressed his hand, and with a glance in which a tear and a smile
       seemed to contend for mastery, he gently indicated why such arrangements were with our
       present manners impossible.  
   fortune is a bore. What I vote that we three do at once is to take plenty of
       ready money, and enter the Austrian service. By Jove, it is the only thing to do."  
  "There is something in that," said Coningsby. "In the meantime, suppose you two fellows
       walk with me to the Temple; for I have an appointment to look at some chambers."  
   in the heart of a great city in the nineteenth century so much of the grave
       romance and picturesque decorum of our past manners. Henry Sydney was very sanguine; he was
       reconciled to the disinheritance of Coningsby by the conviction that it was a providential
       dispensation to make him a Lord Chancellor.  
  These faithful friends remained in town with Coningsby until he was established in Paper
       Buildings, and had become a pupil of a celebrated special pleader. They would have remained
       longer, had not he himself suggested that it was better that they should part. They parted
       with deep emotion. It seemed a terrible catastrophe after all the visions of their boyish
       days; their college dreams; and their dazzling adventures in the world.  
  "And this is the end of Coningsby, the brilliant Coningsby, that we all loved, that was to
       be our leader!" said Buckhurst to Lord Henry as they quitted him. "Well, come what may, life
       has lost something of its bloom."  
   be frequently together. It is dreadful to think that in the ways of life our
       hearts may become estranged. I never felt more wretched than I do at this moment, and yet I
       have faith that we shall not lose him."  
  "Amen!" said Buckhurst, "but I feel my plan about the Austrian service was after all the
       only thing. The continent offers a career. He might have been Prime Minister: several
       strangers have been; and as for war, look at Brown and Laudohn and half a hundred others. I
       had a much better chance of being a Field-Marshal than he has of being a Lord
       Chancellor."  
  "I feel quite convinced that Coningsby will be Lord Chancellor," said Henry Sydney
       gravely.  
   was nothing to haunt his mind; no inexperienced scene or sensation of life to
       distract his intelligence. One sacred thought alone indeed there remained, shrined in the
       innermost sanctuary of his heart and consciousness. But it was a tradition, no longer a hope.
       The moment that he had fairly recovered from the first shock of his grandfather's will, had
       clearly ascertained the consequences to himself, and had resolved on the course to pursue, he
       had communicated unreservedly with Oswald Millbank, and had renounced those pretensions to
       the hand of his sister which it ill became the destitute to prefer.  
   all was hopeless. In no way did Coningsby ever permit himself to intimate to
       Oswald the cause of his disinheritance. He was of course silent on it to his other friends,
       as any communication of the kind must have touched on a subject that was consecrated in his
       inmost soul.  
  
  CHAPTER VI.  
   and party prudence, it was unquestionably a great mistake, had infused into the
       corpse of Whig authority a kind of galvanic action, which only the superficial could mistake
       for vitality. Even to form a basis for their future operations, after the conjuncture of—39,
       the Whigs were obliged to make a fresh inroad on the revenue, the daily increasing debility
       of which was now arresting attention, and exciting public alarm. It was clear that the
       catastrophe of the government would be financial.  
   powerful party were influenced by great principles; had in their view a
       definite and national policy; and would secure England, instead of a feeble administration
       and fluctuating opinions, energy and a creed.  
   the game must ultimately be won by popular clamor. It always seemed so
       impossible that the Conservative party could ever be popular, the extreme graciousness and
       personal popularity of the leaders not being generally esteemed a sufficient hedge against
       the inveterate odium that attached to their opinions, that the Tadpole philosophy was the
       favoured tenet in high places; and Taper had had his knuckles well rapped more than once for
       manoeuvring too actively against the New Poor Law, and for hiring several linkboys to bawl a
       much wronged lady's name in the Park when the Court prorogued Parliament.  
   higher than the perpetuation of fiscal arrangements some of them very
       impolitic, none of them very important. But no matter what different bodies of men understood
       by the cry in which they all joined, the Cry existed; Taper beat Tadpole; and the great
       Conservative party beat the shattered and exhausted Whigs.  
   the bar, all his friends must join and get up the steam. Coningsby had once met
       Mr. Rigby who was walking with the Duke of Agincourt, which was probably the reason he could
       not notice a lawyer. Mr. Rigby cut Coningsby.  
   the communication of Rigby to Lord Monmouth as to the presence of Oswald
       Millbank at the Castle and the love of Coningsby for his sister; all these details, furnished
       by Villebecque to Lord Eskdale had been duly transferred by that nobleman to his co-executor;
       and Sidonia, when he had sufficiently digested them, had made Lady Wallinger acquainted with
       the whole history.  
   impulses of his nature, had been preparing him. It was a keen trial of a man.
       Every one of his friends and old companions were candidates and with sanguine prospects. Lord
       Henry was certain for a division of his county; Buckhurst harangued a large agricultural
       borough in his vicinity; Eustace Lyle and Vere stood in coalition for a Yorkshire town; and
       Oswald Millbank solicited the suffrages of a very important manufacturing constituency. They
       sent their addresses to Coningsby. He was deeply interested as he traced in them the
       influence of his own mind; often recognised the very expressions to which he had habituated
       them. Amid the confusion of a general election, no unimpassioned critic had time to canvass
       the language of an address to an isolated constituency; yet an intelligent speculator on the
       movements of political parties might have detected in these public declarations some
       intimation of new views, and of a tone of political feeling that has unfortunately been too
       long absent from the public life of this country.  
   ray of the sun shooting down Pall Mall sweltering with dust; there was a crowd
       round the doors of the Carlton and the Reform Clubs, and every now and then an express
       arrived with the agitating bulletin of a fresh defeat or a new triumph. Coningsby was walking
       up Pall Mall. He was going to dine at the Oxford and Cambridge Club, the only club on whose
       list he had retained his name, that he might occasionally have the pleasure of meeting an
       Eton or Cambridge friend without the annoyance of encountering any of his former fashionable
       acquaintances. He lighted in his walk on Mr. Tadpole and Mr. Taper, both of whom he knew. The
       latter did not notice him, but Mr. Tadpole more good-natured bestowed on him a rough nod, not
       unmarked by a slight expression of coarse pity.  
   unknown danger, now first introduced to their notice. Being true Englishmen,
       they were all against Buckhurst's opponent, who was of the Venetian party, and who ended by
       calling out Buckhurst for his personalities.  
  Coningsby had dined, and was reading in the library, when a waiter brought up a third
       edition of the Sun, with electioneering bulletins from the manufacturing districts to the
       very latest hour. Some large letters which expressed the name of Darlford caught his eye.
       There seemed great excitement in that borough; strange proceedings had happened. The column
       was headed, "Extraordinary Affair! Withdrawal of the Liberal Candidate! Two Tory Candidates
       in the field!!!"  
   interest in the town and trade of Darlford; he hoped that the link between the
       Borough and Hellingsley would be ever cherished (loud cheering); he wished in parting from
       them to take a step which should conciliate all parties, put an end to local heats and
       factious contentions, and secure the town an able and worthy representative. For these
       reasons he begged to propose to them a gentleman who bore a name which many of them greatly
       honoured, for himself he knew the individual, and it was his firm opinion that whether they
       considered his talents, his character, or the ancient connection of his family with the
       district, he could not propose a candidate more worthy of their confidence than   Harry
        Coningsby, Esq.    
   that his friends could refuse him high office. The whole of Lord Monmouth's
       reduced legacy was devoted to this end. The third edition of the Sun left Mr. Rigby in vain
       attempting to address an infuriated populace.  
   when they were to repair together immediately to Darlford in time for Coningsby
       to be chaired, for no one entertained a doubt of his triumph.  
  Coningsby did not sleep a wink that night, and yet when he rose early felt fresh enough for
       any exploit however difficult or hazardous. He felt as an Egyptian does when the Nile rises
       after its elevation had been despaired of. At the very lowest ebb of his fortunes, an event
       had occurred which seemed to restore all. He dared not contemplate the ultimate result of all
       these wonderful changes. Enough for him that when all seemed dark, he was about to be
       returned to Parliament by the father of Edith, and his vanquished rival who was to bite the
       dust before him, was the author of all his misfortunes. Love, Vengeance, Justice, the
       glorious pride of having acted rightly, the triumphant sense of complete and absolute
       success—here were chaotic materials from which order was at length evolved; and all-subsided
       in an overwhelming feeling of gratitude to that Providence that had so signally protected
       him.  
   Oswald was as excited as Coningsby. His eye sparkled, his manner was
       energetic.  
  "We must talk it all over during our journey. We have not a minute to waste."  
   absolutely impressed with Coningsby's admirable conduct, and Lady Wallinger was
       determined that her husband should express to others the convictions which he acknowledged in
       unison with herself. Sir Joseph spoke to Mr. Millbank who stared, but Sir Joseph spoke
       feebly. Lady Wallinger conveyed all this intelligence and all her impressions to Oswald and
       Edith. The younger Millbank talked with his father, who making no admissions listened with
       interest, inveighed against Lord Monmouth, and condemned his will.  
   the silent sadness of Edith, his own conviction which assured him that he could
       do nothing wiser or better than take this young man to his heart, so ordained it that Mr.
       Millbank who was after all the creature of impulse, decided suddenly, and decided rightly.
       Never making a single admission to all the representations of his son, Mr. Millbank in a
       moment did all that his son could have dared to desire.  
  This is a very imperfect and crude intimation of what had occurred at Millbank and
       Hellingsley; yet it conveys a faint sketch of the enchanting intelligence that Oswald
       conveyed to Coningsby during their rapid travel. When they arrived at Birmingham they found a
       messenger and a despatch informing Coningsby that at mid-day at Darlford he was at the head
       of the poll by an overwhelming majority, and that Mr. Rigby had resigned. He was however
       requested to remain at Birmingham, as they did not wish him to enter Darlford except to be
       chaired, so he was to arrive there in the morning. At Birmingham therefore they remained.  
   had time for this. Now they were both Members of Parliament. Men must have been
       at school together, to enjoy the real fun of meeting thus and realizing boyish dreams. Often
       years ago they had talked of these things and assumed these results, but those were words and
       dreams; these were positive facts; after some doubts and struggles, in the freshness of their
       youth, Oswald Millbank and Harry Coningsby were Members of the British Parliament; public
       characters, responsible agents, with a career.  
   become elements of power, springs of the great machine.  
  A train arrived; restless they sallied forth to seek diversion in the dispersion of the
       passengers. Coningsby and Millbank, with that glance, a little inquisitive, even impertinent,
       if we must confess it, with which one greets a stranger when he emerges from a public
       conveyance, were lounging on the platform. The train arrived; stopped; the doors were thrown
       open, and from one of them emerged Mr. Rigby! Coningsby, who had dined, was greatly tempted
       to take off his hat and make him a bow, but he refrained. Their eyes met. Rigby was dead
       beat. He was evidently used up; a man without a resource; the sight of Coningsby his last
       blow; he had met his fate.  
  "My dear fellow," said Coningsby, "I remember I wanted you to dine with my grandfather at
       Montem, and that fellow would not ask you. Such is life!"  
   ribbons, and drawn by six beautiful grey horses caparisoned in his colours, and
       ridden by postillions, whose very whips were blue and white. Triumphant music sounded;
       banners waved; the multitude were marshalled; the Freemasons at the first opportunity fell
       into the procession; the Odd Fellows joined it at the nearest corner. Preceded and followed
       by thousands, with colours flying, trumpets sounding, and endless huzzas, flags and
       handkerchiefs waving from every window, and every balcony filled with dames and maidens
       bedecked with his colours, Coningsby was borne through enthusiastic Darlford like Paulus
       Emilius returning from Macedon. Uncovered, still in deep mourning, his fine figure and
       graceful bearing, and his intelligent brow, at once won every female heart.  
  The singularity was that all were of the same opinion: everybody cheered him, every house
       was adorned with his colours. His triumphant return was no party question; Magog Wrath and
       Bully Bluck walked together like lambs at the head of his procession.  
   The broad street was so crowded, that as every one declared you might have
       walked on the heads of the people. Every window was full; the very roofs were peopled. The
       car stopped, and the populace gave three cheers for Mr. Millbank. Their late member
       surrounded by his friends stood in the balcony which was fitted up with Coningsby's colours
       and bore his name on the hangings in gigantic letters formed of dahlias. The flashing and
       inquiring eye of Coningsby caught the form of Edith, who was leaning on her father's arm.  
  The hustings were opposite the hotel, and here after a while Coningsby was carried, and
       stepping from his car, took up his post to address for the first time a public assembly.
       Anxious as the people were to hear him, it was long before their enthusiasm could subside
       into silence. At length that silence was deep and absolute. He spoke; his powerful and rich
       tones reached every ear. In five minutes' time every one looked at his neighbour, and without
       speaking they agreed that there never was anything like this heard in Darlford before.  
   to express his gratitude for the unprecedented manner in which he had become
       their representative and for the spirit in which they had greeted him; but he had to offer
       them no niggard exposition of the views and opinions of the member whom they had so
       confidingly chosen without even a formal declaration of his sentiments.  
  He did this with so much clearness, and in a manner so pointed and popular, that the deep
       attention of the multitude never wavered. His lively illustrations kept them often in
       continued merriment. But when towards his close he drew some picture of what he hoped might
       be the character of his future and lasting connexion with the town, the vast throng was
       singularly affected. There were a great many present at that moment who though they had never
       seen Coningsby before, would willingly have then died for him. Coningsby had touched their
       hearts, for he had spoken from his own. His spirit had entirely magnetized them. Darlford
       believed in Coningsby: and a very good creed.  
   The progress was slow, as every one wished to shake hands with him. His
       friends, however, at last safely landed him. He sprang up the stairs: he was met by Mr.
       Millbank, who welcomed him with the greatest warmth, and offered his hearty
       congratulations.  
  "It is to you, dear sir, that I am indebted for all this," said Coningsby.  
  "No," said Mr. Millbank, "it is to your own high principles, great talents, and good
       heart."  
  After he had been presented by the late Member to the principal personages in the borough,
       Mr. Millbank said:  
  "I think we must now give Mr. Coningsby a little rest. "Come with me," he added; "here is
       some one who will be very glad to see you."  
  Speaking thus, he led our hero a little away, and placing his arm in Coningsby's, with
       great affection opened the door of an apartment. There was Edith radiant with loveliness and
       beaming with love. Their agitated hearts told at a glance the tumult of their joy. The father
       joined their hands, and blessed them with words of tenderness.  
  
  CHAPTER VII.  
  The marriage of Coningsby and Edith took place early in the autumn. It was
       solemnized at Millbank, and they passed their first moon at Hellingsley, which place was in
       future to be the residence of the member for Darlford. The estate was to devolve to Coningsby
       after the death of Mr. Millbank who in the meantime made arrangements which permitted the
       newlymarried couple to reside at the Hall in a manner becoming its occupants. All these
       settlements, as Mr. Millbank assured Coningsby, were effected not only with the sanction, but
       at the express instance, of his son.  
   and they raised a monument to her memory in the gardens of Hellingsley.  
  Coningsby passed his next Christmas in his own hall with his beautiful and gifted wife by
       his side and surrounded by the friends of his heart and his youth.  
   a generalizing age that have destroyed the individuality of man; and restore
       the happiness of their country by believing in their own energies, and daring to be
       great!  
  THE END.  
  
  
  
  
  